
KPMG shows how licensing varies across different industries and the implications thereof.

Credit: [KPMG International](https://home.kpmg.com/xx/en/home.html)

{! search-content: !}


ADVISORY
Proftability and royalty
rates across industries:
Some preliminary evidence
2012
kpmg.com
KPMG INTERNATIONAL
cutting through complexity

GVI Global Valuation Institute


Foreword

KPMG’s Global valuation institute (Gvi) is pleased to introduce its second management paper since the launch of our research agenda, authored by Jonathan E. Kemmerer and Jiaqing “Jack” Lu.

As an independent think tank, we recognize that valuation is a constantly evolving discipline that has been shaped by practical and theoretical advances. Many high quality research papers on valuation subjects never fnd their way to inﬂuencing the evolution of standards and practice due to a lack of exposure to practitioners.

Our goal is to act as a catalyst for the adoption of breakthrough valuation research. To this end, KPMG’s Gvi benefts from the expertise of an Academic Advisory Board comprised of professors from Beijing University in China, Northwestern University in the Us and oxford University in the UK. This Board designs a research agenda and selects and reviews the research we sponsor.

We work closely with researchers to present their managerial papers in a format that is understandable to a broad range of business professionals. his includes illustrative papers with applications and/or case studies. Through this process, we keep KPMG’s global network of 1,200 valuation professionals informed of emerging valuation issues.

With the growing and critical importance of intellectual property in our modern societies, it is vital for practitioners to be able to value iP adequately. in this paper, Jack Lu and Jonathan Kemmerer explore the 25 percent rule in the licensing market to determine royalty rates and the relationship between royalty rates and proftability. Goldscheider defnes the 25 percent rule as “the licensee paying a royalty rate equivalent to 25 percent of its expected proft for the product that incorporates the iP at issue” .

The authors’ found that the reported royalty rates across industries do not converge with the rates generated by the 25 percent rule, although they tend to fall between 25 percent of gross margins and 25 percent of operating margins. The EBiTdA margin seems to be a more reasonable basis to apply the 25 percent rule as opposed to the EBiT margin sometimes used by practitioners.

Lastly, the authors also found a linear relationship between reported royalty rates and several proftability measures, showing the 25 percent rule as a special case of this relationship.

This paper is the second of a series that will be sponsored by KPMG’s Global valuation institute. As practitioners, we trust that you will fnd these of interest.


Yves Courtois
Partner
KPMG in Luxembourg

Doug McPhee
Partner
KPMG in the UK

Jean Florent Rerolle
Partner
KPMG in France

This paper reﬂects the views of the authors and not necessarily those of KPMG.
© 2012 KPMG International Cooperative (“KPMG International”), a Swiss entity. Member firms of the KPMG network of independent firms are affiliated with KPMG Internatio


Proftability and royalty rates across industries | 1

Abstract

Is the licensing market effcient such that royalty rates reﬂect costs and proftability across industries? This paper tries to answer the question through exploring the relationship between royalty rates and proftability. Analysis shows that the reported royalty rates across industries do not converge with the rates generated by the 25 percent rule, although they tend to fall between 25 percent of gross margins and 25 percent of operating margins. Regression analyses indicate that there is a linear relationship between reported royalty rates and various proftability measures, which suggests that the licensing market is effcient and that cost structure and proftability across industries have been factored into royalty rate negotiation. Therefore, the 25 percent rule is simply a special case of such a general linear relationship. A revisit of the data in Goldscheider et al (2002) further demonstrates that a “forced” linear ftting seems to make the average royalty rate equal to 23 percent of the average operating proft margin, rendering indirect support to the 25 percent rule. However, such a conclusion should be taken as for the purpose of illustration and contrast only, because no general linear relationship was found between the reported royalty rates and operating margins as defned by Goldscheider et al (2002).

Jonathan E. Kemmerer earned his BBA in accounting from The University of Texas at Austin, and is a founding partner and managing director of Applied Economics Consulting Group, Inc. He is a CPA, member of the American Institute of CPAs, the Texas Society of CPAs, and is a member of the Licensing Executives Society. 

Mr. Kemmerer can be contacted at jkemmerer@aecgi.com. Jiaqing “Jack” Lu received his Ph.D. from the University of Texas at Austin, and is the Chief Economist and a Senior Director for IP Market Advisory Practice (IPMAP) at Applied Economics Consulting Group, Inc. He is a Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA), and is a member of the CFA Institute, the National Association for Business Economics, and the Licensing Executives Society. He can be reached at jqlu@aecgi.com.




Introduction

Royalty payments can be interpreted as a proft sharing mechanism. In other words, by receiving royalty income, a technology licensor shares the profit streams generated from the licensee’s efforts in commercializing the patented technology. Royalty rates in a majority of license agreements are defned as a percentage of sales or a payment per unit. However, the proftability of the products or services that incorporate the patented technology plays a dominant role in royalty determination. According to a survey published by Degan and Horton (1997), when asked what fnancial measures they used in determining royalty amounts, more than half of the survey respondents listed discounted cash ﬂow or proft sharing analysis, while nearly a quarter used the 25 percent rule as a starting point. 

This paper explores the relationship between proftability and royalty rates across industries.1We will answer two questions in patent licensing. First, do reported royalty rates across industries, on average, converge with the rates generated by the 25 percent rule? Second and more generally, is the licensing market effcient such that reported royalty rates reﬂect the proftability across industries? Intuitively, the higher an industry’s proftability, the higher the royalty rate. If a linear relationship exists between proftability and reported royalty rates, the 25 percent rule is simply a special case of such a general linear relationship.

Analysis of the data shows that reported royalty rates across industries do not converge with the rates generated by 25 percent rule at an industry level, although the reported rates tend to fall between 25 percent of gross proft margins and 25 percent of operating proft margins. Analysis also indicates that EBITDA may be a reasonable base for applying the 25 percent rule. 

Regression analyses using industry data further demonstrates that, generally, there is a linear relationship between reported royalty rates and various proftability measures. Specifcally, the reported royalty rates account for 15 percent, 41 percent, and 54 percent of gross, EBITDA, and EBIT margins, respectively. Such a linear relationship suggests that the licensing market is effcient and cost structure and proftability across industries have been factored into the royalty rate negotiation. The 25 percent rule is simply a special case of such general linear relationship.

1 Throughout the paper, royalty rate is defned as a fxed percentage rate of sales.


Does this mean that the 25 percent rule is invalid? The answer is no. We agree with many authors that the 25 percent rule serves as a good starting point for royalty negotiations. Also, based on the authors analyses on the data published in Goldscheider, et al. (2002), a “forced” linear ftting seems to make the average royalty rate equal to 23 percent of the operating proft margin, indirectly supporting the 25 percent rule. However, such a conclusion should be taken as for the purpose of illustration and contrast only, because no linear relationship was found between the reported royalty rates and operating margins as defned by Goldscheider, et al. (2002).

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 1 brieﬂy reviews the literature, especially the most recent efforts by researchers and practitioners in studying the 25 percent rule. The scope of this research is also defned in this section which mainly highlights the differences between this paper and the earlier ones, specifcally Goldscheider, et al. (2002). Section 2 describes the data issues and discusses certain important issues in calculating proftability measures. Section 3 presents the data analyses to determine if reported royalty rates across industries converge with the rates generated by the 25 percent rule. Sections 4 and 5 report regression analyses on the reported royalty rates against various proft margins. Finally, Section 6 discusses the implicationsof the results and highlights issues for further research.



1. Literature review and research scope

Discussions about proftability and royalty rate determination have generated a large pool of literature. In most intellectual property (IP) related books, such topics are addressed in at least three places: the Georgia-Pacifc factors, the income approach for IP valuation, and the 25 percent rule. The discussions usually offer general guidelines and qualitative descriptions about the importance of proftability without much analytical elaboration (let alone empirical evidence).

It is the persistent interest in the 25 percent rule from IP researchers and practitioners that has advanced the understanding of the relationship between proftability and royalty rate. The 25 percent rule, as defned by Goldscheider, et al. (2002), “suggests that the licensee pay a royalty rate equivalent to 25 percent of its expected profts for the product that incorporates the IP at issue.” Over the years, this rule has gained popularity as a good starting point for royalty negotiations, thanks to its simplicity, intuitive reasonableness, and the keen advocacy from well-respected authors including Goldscheider and Razgaitis. Goldscheider frst wrote about the rule in the 1970s. Since then, there have been numerous publications focusing on the 25 percent rule, among which the most recent ones include Goldscheider (2001), Goldscheider, et al. (2002), and Razgaitis (1999, 2002).

Not surprisingly, the 25 percent rule has also encountered criticism for its one-size-fts-all nature, seeming oversimplifcation, and failure to consider many important factors in royalty rate determinations. A complete review of major criticisms can be found in Goldscheider, et al. (2002). Most recently, Hagelin (2004) pointed out several other problems arising from application of the rule, including profit measurement, cost inclusion and contributions of non-infringing assets. 

In the wake of criticism, the recent research regarding the 25 percent rule has refocused on two new areas. First, there have been efforts to generalize the rule, which would imply that the name of “the 25 percent rule” simply means a general rule of thumb associating royalty rates with operating proft. The rule might better be referred to as the 25 percent to 33 percent rule, as suggested by Razgaitis (2002). Grandstrand (2006) offers another way to support the 25 percent rule. According to his model, the rule is simply a special case of his general model, by which a licensor’s share of profts equals his/her share of total investment in bringing the technology into commercialization. In other words, when a licensor’s share in total investment is 25 percent, his model becomes the 25 percent rule.

Second, the recent research has turned to empirical evidence to seek further justifcation for the 25 percent rule. Razgaitis (2002) pointed out that the actual percentage can vary a great deal. For software and content licensing, it could be as high as 50 percent. Jousma (2005) analyzed royalty determination in the pharmaceutical industry and concluded that the 25 percent rule can be a good starting point for a start-of phase I deal. For the deals commencing at start-of-registration, 50 percent is more reasonable, while rates for start f-phase II and III transactions are about 33 percent and 40 percent, respectively.

The most comprehensive study, conducted by Goldscheider and his co-authors, was frst published in Les Nouvelles in 2002 and was later included in Parr and Smith (2004) and Parr (2007). In this now well-cited study, Goldsheider, et al. concluded that based on the royalty rates reported by RoyaltySource, the median rate of 347 licensee companies converges with the rate generated from applying the 25 percent rule to the weighted operating proft margins of the same group of companies.


Research scope

While this research also address the 25 percent rule as part of the efforts to explore a generic relationship between proftability and royalty rates, the paper expands the research scope beyond that of the existing literature. First, the main purpose of this paper is not to test the validity of the 25 percent rule. Instead, it aims at answering a more fundamental question: is the licensing market effcient such that the reported royalty rates reﬂect the cost structures and proftability across various industries? Since the reported royalty rates are defned as a fxed percentage of sales, it is especially interesting to see whether royalty negotiations have factored in the cost and proftability characteristics across industries.

Second, the authors research focuses more on the industry pattern, not a simple aggregate of individual companies as in Goldscheider, et al. (2002). In other words, this paper focuses on exploring the pattern of royalty rates and proftability across industries in an effort to gain the insight of the relationship between the pair.

Finally, instead of using only one proftability measure, namely, operating proft, the paper calculates three different proft margins for all industry sectors studied. The goal is to examine the general relationship between royalty rates and proftability and to investigate how the royalty rates are associated with various proftability measures.


2. Data description and proftability measures

Data description

Industrial classifcation:The royalty rate data by industry used in this paper is from RoyaltySource of AUS Consultants and the company fnancial data from CompuStat. RoyaltySource reported royalty data for 15 industries on its publication the Licensing Economics Review (LER). It is important for us to classify the companies in the same way as RoyaltySource does, because RoyaltySource’s classifcation is different from other standard classifcations such as the US Government’s SIC and NAICS or those used by private data vendors such as Standard and Poor’s. Therefore, simply matching RoyaltySource’s classifcation with others could lead to completely mismatched data, rendering the research outcome meaningless.

This paper adopts the classifcation as reported by the RoyaltySource, but reduces it to 14 industries by combining the internet and software sectors.2The company list was generated at the 4-digit SIC code level by querying CompuStat. The query yielded a total of 3,887 companies that match RoyaltySource’s classifcation.3 Individual companies are then mapped into 14 industries. The industry namesand corresponding 4-digit SIC codes are reported in the Appendix at the end of this paper.

Royalty rate data:The royalty data calculated by RoyaltySource is published annually in the December issue of LER. The most recent survey was published in December 2007, which was calculated from a sample of 3,015 transactions collected over a 21-year period. The transactions are then classifed into 15 industries. Two industries, health/medical products and pharmaceuticals, account for nearly half of the transactions, while media and entertainment have only 43. For further details, refer to the December 2007 issue of LER.

Financial data: Financial data were retrieved from CompuStat, and ratios and percentages were calculated. Average proft margin is calculated as an arithmetic mean of the proft margins of all companies in the sector with data available, in an effort to alleviate the effects of large companies possibly caused by sales-weighted proft margins. A signifcant number of companies in each industry report negative proft margins, especially EBIT margins. After balancing potential negatives and positives, the authors decided to truncate the samples by excluding all companies with negative margins.4


Proftability measures

Proft margins at company level vs. at the product level: To better explore the relationship between royalty rates and proftability, proft margins need to be calculated at product level for the specifc product that incorporates the licensed technology. Again, it is virtually impossible in practice to compile the data for proftability analysis at the product level. Companies usually produce dozens or even hundreds of products, and they are usually reluctant to disclose fnancial data at the product level, even if they internally compile such data.

As a result, proft margins at the company level as a proxy are used, based on several important considerations. First of all, over the product life cycle, proft margins will typically swing signifcantly, from negative initially, to higher margins when sales are rising, and eventually ﬂatten out and even decline when the market saturates. Therefore, over its life cycle, a product’s proft margin should converge to the company average margin. Industry wide, competition would be expected to ultimately drive away any price premium and/or cost advantage a product enjoys, making product proftability revert to industry average. 

Gross margin vs. operating proft margin:The last issue, is what proftability measure should be used for our study. According to accounting and fnancial reporting principles, there are three major proftability measures. Gross proft is measured as sales less manufacturing costs that include mainly raw materials, direct labor costs, and other costs directly associated with production. Operating proft equals the gross profts less operating costs such as sales, marketing, and general administrative (SMGA), and R&D costs. Operating proft with depreciation and amortization costs subtracted is called earnings before income tax or EBIT, and before such subtraction, referred to as earnings before income tax, depreciation, and amortization or EBITDA.


2 This was done for two reasons. First, internet companies’ major assets are software to operate the internet business model, any in- or out-licensing may well involve software technology. It is hard to imagine that eBay, Amazon or Yahoo may license signifcant other technology besides software. Second, separating internet from software businesses would make it hard to classify a company whose business is selling software through internet.
3 The authors want to thank Mr. David Weiler of AUS Consultants for explaining RoyaltySource’s classifcation in great detail. Any errors or mistakes in matching the companies with the RoyaltySource classifcation are ours.
Based on the discussion with Mr. Weiler and our understanding, only manufacturing companies or services companies were included, not service outlets. For example, while food processing companies are included, restaurants are not. By the same token, apparel producing companies are included, but supermarkets such as JCPenny and Dillards are excluded.
4 Truncating data this way can be justifed in practice. Specifcally, according to the 25 percent rule, licensees would not pay negative royalty to licensors. Generally, since the goal is to examine the relationship between royalty rate and proftability, associating royalty rates with negative proft margins would distort the relationship, as will be seen later in this paper.


Since most patented technologies are utilized to either increase sales volumes or reduce direct costs, it is reasonable to associate gross proft with the royalty rate. However, as pointed out by Parr (1999) and Parr and Smith (2000), operating expenses and operating profts certainly play important roles in determining royalty rates. For example, a patented technology ready for incorporation into an existing manufacturing process should command a higher royalty rate than a similar one that requires large spending in further R&D.

If operating proft is relevant, which should be used, EBIT or EBITDA?5 Compared to EBIT, EBITDA, which includes two non-cash items of depreciation and amortization, is a better indicator for value creation. It is also neutral to capital intensity, and without including depreciation and amortization, is more immunized to potential accounting manipulations such as depreciation method and useful life estimates.6 EBIT measures net proftability before interest and tax and is immunized to capital structure and fnancing method. However, it is more sensitive to capital intensity and accounting methods.

All three proftability measures were calculated based on the historical data from CompuStat7 and will discuss their relationships with the reported royalty rates in the rest of this paper.

5 When addressing the 25 percent rule, most authors have used loose terms such as “gross profts, before tax”, “operating profts”, or “pre-tax proftability” (see Razgaitis (2002), Goldscheider (2001), Goldscheider et al (2002), Parr and Smith (2000), Parr (1999), and Battersby and Grimes (2001)).
6 The argument that all other things being equal – a patent incurring less initial capital investment should command a higher royalty rate than the one requiring more initial investment – is not valid. In an effcient market, if a less capital-intensive alternative exists, the more one will have no market share (unless the more capital-intensive one is superior so that net PV is positive for the licensee). However, the superiority violates the condition of “all other things being equal”.
7 It is worth to pointing out that theoretically, expected margins should be used instead of historical for royalty rate research, because in licensing negotiation, the focus is on expected margins. However, for the purpose of research, we would have to use historic margins.



3. Royalty rates and the 25 percent rule across industries

Reported royalty rates and the rates implied by the 25 percent rule: The big picture

Table 1 shows the average proft margins for all of the companies with data available for margin calculation, out of the 3,887 companies. It also compares the royalty rates implied by the 25 percent rule with the average rates reported by RoyaltySource.

TABLE 1: PROFIT MARGINS, RATES FROM THE 25 PERCENT RULE, & REPORTED ROYALTY RATES

Gross proft margin
EBITDA margin
EBIT margin
3-year average gross proft margin
3-year average EBITDA margin
3-year average EBIT margin
Average proft margin 46.5% 18.6% 13.7% 46.0% 17.7% 13.2%
25% of the average proft margin 11.6% 4.7% 3.4% 11.5% 4.4% 3.3%
Reported average royalty rate 7.0% 7.0% 7.0% 7.0% 7.0% 7.0%
Median proft margin 45.0% 14.3% 10.9% 44.2% 13.7% 10.5%
25% of the median proft margin 11.3% 3.6% 2.7% 11.1% 3.4% 2.6%
Reported median royalty rate 5.0% 5.0% 5.0% 5.0% 5.0% 5.0%
Source: Authors’ calculation based on CompuStat Research Insight CD-ROM, December, 2007

Several observations can be made. First, applying the 25 percent rule to the average operating proft margins would imply a royalty rate of 3.3 percent to 4.7 percent, while the average rate reported by RoyaltySource is 7 percent. Similarly, 25 percent of median operating proft margins points to royalty rates of 2.6 percent to 3.6 percent, as compared the median reported rate of 5 percent. Second, taking 25 percent of gross margins – both average and median – yielded a relatively stable royalty rate of 11 percent.

Third, at the aggregate level, the reported royalty rates fall between 25 percent of operating margins and 25 percent of gross margin. More precisely, the rates from taking 25 percent of EBITDA margins seem to best approximate the reported royalty rates, as compared to the rates generated from applying the rule to gross margins and EBIT margins.

Table 1 reports both average and median rates, as well as one year rates and 3 year average rates. As Table 1 shows, using median and 3 year average rates does not signifcantly alter the conclusions reached so far. Therefore, in the rest of the paper, the analyses are based on only the average rates and margins.


Industrial profle: Royalty rates and proftability across industries

Chart 1 illustrates the industry pattern of reported royalty rates and the rates calculated by the 25 percent rule. The chart adds further evidence to the conclusions reached in Section 3. For example, across 14 industries, reported royalty rates generally fall between 25 percent of the operating margins and 25 percent of the gross margins. In other words, 25 percent of gross margin serves as an upper bound for the reported rates, while the 25 percent of EBIT margins provides a lower bound.

Also, across 14 industries, the rates generated from 25 percent of EBITDA margins are persistently closer to the reported rates, implying that the EBITDA margin may be a better base for using the 25 percent rule. It is mentioned in Section 2 that since EBIT margin is sensitive to capital intensity and may be subject to accounting manipulations, EBITDA margin should be more consistent and reliable. However, Chart 1 does not support this proposition at the industry level because the rates generated by applying the 25 percent rule
to EBITDA and EBIT margins ﬂuctuate closely and persistently across industries.

16.0%
14.0%
12.0%
10.0%
8.0%
6.0%
4.0%
2.0%
0.0%
Food proc.
Elec.
Chem.
Auto
Semicon.
Energy
Mach/Tool
Comp/Equip.
Telecom
Medical
Consumer
Pharm.
Internet/SW
Media/Ent.
25% of EBITDA margin
25% of gross profit margin
Reported royalty rate
25% of EBIT margin
CHART 1: REPORTED ROYALTY RATES VS. RATES FROM THE 25 PERCENT RULE
Sources: RoyaltySources, December 2007 and authors’ calculation based on CompuStat Research Insight CD-ROM, December, 2007

Finally, the rates calculated from applying the 25 percent rule to operating margins are signifcantly below the reported rates for industries such as internet/software and media. This seems to corroborate Razgaitis (2002), who concludes that the actual percentages to be applied to operating margins can vary across industries, and that for software and content licensing, even 50 percent is reasonable. Since the 25 percent rule was proposed some years ago, it could be possible that the rule better fts the licensing transactions in traditional industries but needs to be adjusted when applied to the so-called ‘new economy’ industries. As a result, when applying to patent- and IP rights-intensive industries such as software/internet and media, the percentage needs to be adjusted higher.



4. Royalty rate and proft margin across industries

If the reported royalty rates do not converge with the rates reached from applying the 25 percent rule to operating proft margins, the next question is: Is there any general linear relationship between royalty rates and proftability? As Goldscheider, et al. (2002), Smith and Parr (2004), and Parr (1999) have pointed out, both direct manufacturing costs and operating expenses should be included in the royalty negotiations. If this is true, assuming the licensing market is effcient, we would expect to see that generally, the higher the proft margins, the higher the associated royalty rates. 

To test whether any linear relationship exists between the reported rates and proftability measures, the authors conducted regression analyses on the reported rates by using proftability measures as explanatory variables. The results are reported in Table 2.

TABLE 2: REGRESSION ANALYSIS: REPORTED ROYALTY RATES (RRR) AGAINST PROFIT MARGINS
Intercept
Independent variables
R2
Gross margin EBITDA margin EBIT margin
Dependent variable: RRR 0.000279 0.1497
0.373
P-value 99.0% 2.0%
Dependent variable: RRR 0.0108 0.34658
0.328
P-value 64.5% 3.2%
Dependent variable: RRR 0.007318 0.4798
0.324
P-value 76.9% 3.4%
Source: Authors’ calculation based on RoyaltySources and CompuStat Research Insight CD-ROM, December 2007

As shown in Table 2, the regression analyses indicate that there are linear relationships between the reported royalty rates and the proft margins. Precisely, the proft margins explain about one-third to 40 percent of the variations across 14 industries, and coeffcients for each of the proft margins are signifcant at 2 percent to 3 percent level. The results are especially impressive considering the limited samples.

Since the intercepts in all of the regression equations are statistically insignifcant, the regressions were re-run by setting the intercept items as zero. The results are reported in Table 3.


TABLE 3: REGRESSION ANALYSIS WITH INTERCEPT = 0: REPORTED ROYALTY RATES (RRR) AGAINST PROFIT MARGINS
Intercept
Independent variables
R2
Gross margin EBITDA margin EBIT margin
Dependent variable: RRR 0 0.1500
0.373
P-value NA 0.0%
Dependent variable: RRR 0 0.4117
0.315
P-value NA 0.0%
Dependent variable: RRR 0 0.5377
0.319
P-value NA 0.0%
Source: Authors’ calculation based on RoyaltySources and CompuStat Research Insight CD-ROM, December 2007



Not surprisingly, the zero-intercept regressions have almost the same explanatory power as indicated by R2. More importantly, the coeffcients in Table 3 may be interpreted as what the 25 percent rule implies. In other words, on average and at the industry level, the reported royalty rates represent 15 percent, 41 percent, and 53 percent of gross, EBITDA, and EBIT margins, respectively. The coeffcient of gross margin, 15 percent, is especially interesting to us since it offers empirical evidence to a survey result published by Degnan and Horton (1997). In answering a hypothetical question of how much they would like to pay as royalties out of gross profts, the respondents in that survey indicated that they would be willing to pay 10–15 percent.

To further explore the relationship between reported royalty rates and proftability across industries, the pairs were plotted in a scatter chart. Since the charts look similar for each of the three proft margins, Chart 2 shows only the gross margin. As demonstrated by Chart 2, the vertical line around 40 percent of gross margin divides the industries into two groups – the group to the right is enjoying higher gross margins than the one to the left.


CHART 2: 2007 REPORTED ROYALTY RATES AND GROSS PROFIT MARGINS
14.0%
12.0%
10.0%
8.0%
6.0%
4.0%
2.0%
0.0%
10.0% 20.0% 30.0% 40.0% 50.0% 60.0%
Semicon.
Pharm.
Medical
Chem.
Auto
Consumer
Media
Gross profit margin
70.0%
Royalty rates
Elect.
Food
Energy;
Mach/Tools
Comp/Equip.
Telecom
Internet/SW
Sources: Authors’ calculation based on RoyaltySources and CompuStat Research Insight CD-ROM, December 2007


This pattern reveals two pairs of contrasts between the groups: First, the contrast between high-tech sectors vs. traditional sectors. The right-hand group consists of mainly technology-intensive sectors such as semiconductor and telecom while the one on the left-hand is mainly traditional sectors such as manufacturing and consumer goods. For example, most sectors in the group of higher proft margins are those producing differentiated or specialty goods such as software and medical/health products which are valued more highly in the market. The group to the left includes the businesses that produce commodities such as chemical materials and plastics and mass consumption goods such as food, auto, and consumption goods as well as general goods such as electrical items and tools.

It seems that the two pairs of contrasts in industry proftability are the fundamental factors supporting the linear relationship between the reported royalty rates and the proftability measures. In other words, sectors that are technology-intensive and produce differentiated products generally register high gross margins and hence can afford higher royalty rates. On the other hand, the traditional sectors and the sectors that produce general purpose goods can only obtain modest or low gross margins, and hence result in lower royalty rates.

Based on the analysis above, it seems that the reported royalty rates, although defned as a fxed percentage of sales, may well reﬂect the structural differences in costs and proftability across industries. In other words, the licensing market is effcient, and differences in the costs and proftability across industries seem to have been factored into royalty rate negotiations.



5. Royalty rates and operating proft margins: Revisit the data and Goldscheider, et al (2002) 

Goldscheider, et al. (2002) reported that, by matching the reported royalty rates with licensees’ operating proft margins, the median royalty rate of 347 companies converge with the royalty rate generated from applying the 25 percent rule to the weighted operating proft margin. This is certainly a very impressive result for a company level analysis.

However, matching the reported royalty rates with licensees’ operating proft data comes at the expense of data exclusion and information loss. First, a majority of reported royalty rates were excluded. According to Goldscheider, et al. (2002), at the time of their research, RoyaltySource reported 1,533 transactions, but matching the reported royalty rate data with licensees’ fnancials left only 347 companies for study. Also, the reduction in sample size made the sample much less industryrepresentative. Their research indicated hat there were 6,309 companies with data for operating margin calculation. However, after the matching, only the data from 347 companies were used for analysis, leaving fve out of the 15 industries with fewer than 10 samples (two of which had fewer han fve samples).

Goldcheider, et al. (2002) calculated median royalty rates and operating margins for 15 industries although they did not conduct any further analysis at the industry level. By contrast, this research is more interested in the relationship between reported rates and proftability across industries. In this section, we will use the data sets reported by Goldscheider, et al. (2002) to conduct regression analyses similar to what was done in Section 4.

Goldscheider and his co-authors reported three pairs of royalty rates and operating proft margins for15 industries,8 including:

i) Industry data: Include all transaction from the RoyaltySource, and weighted operating proft margins calculated from Bloomberg data. The authors did not use this data set to test the 25 percent rule, citing that “total industry profts are not a particularly close match to royalty rates covering a limited number of companies.”

ii) Licensee data:The royalty rates and weighted operating proft margins are matched for the set of licensee companies.

iii) Successful licensee data: Royalty rates are the same in Licensee Data, while the operating proft margin data is calculated based on only the successful licensees, defned as the licensees “with proft rates in the top quartile for each industries.”

The authors frst conduct three sets of regression analyses for each of the data sets above, including all 15 industries. However, the coeffcients for the operating proft margins in all of the three equations are negative. This is counter-intuitive and inconsistent with what the 25 percent rule would imply. Through analyzing the scatter charts, the authors found that such a counterintuitive pattern was caused by including negative operating proft margins in the analysis. Therefore, one industry was excluded with a negative proft margin from each of the data sets and re-run the regression with only 14 industries. The results are reported in Table 4.

TABLE 4: REGRESSION ANALYSIS: BASED ON GOLDSCHEIDER ET AL (2002) DATA
Dependent variable and
P-value Intercept
Independent variables
R2
Industry operating
margin
Licensee
operating
margin
Successful
licensee
operating margin
Industry median royalty rate 0.0345 0.1059
0.108
P-value 0.0% 25.15%
Licensee median royalty rate 0.034719 0.048247
0.108
P-value 0.0% 25.2%
Licensee median royalty rate 0.035336 0.038367
0.04
P-value 0.0% 49.2%
Source: Authors’ calculation based on Goldscheider, et al. (2002)

8 Goldscheider et al (2002) developed their own industry categories that “are somewhat different than the internal classifcation system used by RoyaltySource”, although they used the same industry names as RoyaltySource. Also, they collected fnancial data from Bloomberg, but did not report how the companies were mapped into the 15 industries.

As Table 4 shows, operating proft margins are able to explain only 4 percent to 11 percent of the variations of the reported royalty rates across industries, and none of the coeffcients for operating margins are statistically signifcant. As a result, using the data in Goldscheider, et al. (2002), we cannot demonstrate that there is general linear relationship between the reported royalty rates and operating proft margins across the 14 industries defned by the authors. This can be vividly seen in Chart 3, where data points scatter around the average royalty rate 4.1 percent.9

As in Section 4, we then depress the intercept in each of the regression models to zero and re-run the analyses. The results are shown in Table 5.

CHART 3: REPORTED MEDIAN ROYALTY RATES AND AVERAGE OPERATING PROFITS
8.0%
7.0%
6.0%
5.0%
4.0%
3.0%
2.0%
1.0%
0.0%
5.0% 10.0% 15.0% 20.0% 25.0% 30.0%
Semicon.
Pharm.
Medical
Chem.
Mach/Tools
Energy
Internet
Auto Telecom Consumer
Elect.
SoftW
Comp/Equip.Food
Average = 4.1%
Licensee average operating profits
35.0%
Median royalty rate
Sources: Goldscheider, et al. (2002)

9 Chart 3 is based on the Licensee Data, excluding Median and Entertainment that was reported to have an operating proft margin of -304.5 percent. Charts with Industry Data and Successful Licensees Data are similar to Chart 3.


A couple of interesting conclusions can be drawn from reading the table. First, the R2 for each of the regression models is negative, which means a linear model without intercept does not ft the data and that there is no linear relationship between the reported rates and operating proft margins. This is simply another way to say that the average of the median royalty rates, or the horizontal line at 4.1 percent in 

Chart 3, fts better than the regression
equations.

Second, by “forcing” a linear ftting with a zero intercept, regression models based on the data set (ii) and (iii) indicate that the reported royalty rates, on average, amount to about 22.5 percent of the weighted operating proft margins. The 22.5 percent number seems to be close to the 26.7 percent number calculated from company-level data in Goldscheider, et al. (2002), and both numbers seem to lend support to the 25 percent rule. However, because there exists no linear relationship between the reported royalty rates and the operating proft margins, the results from such an “imposed” ftting should be taken as for the purpose of illustration and contrast only.


6. Discussions and conclusions

This paper reaches three important conclusions. First, the reported royalty rates across industries do not converge with the rates generated by the 25 percent rule at industry level, although they generally fall between 25 percent of gross proft margins and 25 percent of operating proft margins. Also, the EBITDA margin seems to be a more reasonable base upon which to apply the 25 percent rule compared to gross margin and EBIT margin.

Second, there is a linear relationship between the reported royalty rates and three proftability measures. As shown in Section 4, the reported royalty rates account for 15 percent, 41 percent, and 53 percent of gross, EBITDA, and EBIT margins, respectively. Such a linear relationship suggests that the licensing market is effcient and cost structure and proftability across industries have been factored into royalty rate negotiations. The 25 percent rule of thumb is simply a special case of such general linear relationship.

Finally, for the purpose of illustration and contrast, the author’s conducted further analyses on the data published in Goldscheider, et al. (2002). In a “forced” linear ftting between the reported royalty rates and operating margins, the coeffcients for the operating margins are about 23 percent, offering some support to the 25 percent rule. However, the reliability of such a conclusion is tempered by the extent and treatment of the data as discussed in Section 5. There are at least three areas that are worth further research efforts.

The research in this paper covers only 14 industries, a very limited size of sample. Further research may focus on collecting royalty rate and fnancial data for more industry sectors, which, hopefully, will increase the sample size and make the research more robust and reliable. Also, it will be very interesting to conduct regression analysis using company level data, such as the data sets in Goldscheider, et al. (2002). While matching will inevitably reduce the sample size and render the sample less industry-representative, studying company level data should reveal additional insights.

Finally, as mentioned in Section 2, the analyses in this paper are based only on the data as published in the December 2007 issue of LER. Royalty Source only publishes data for 15 industries although it collects much more licensing transaction data then it actually reports. There are many licensing transactions with royalty payments in either unit running rates, percentages of certain proft measures, or simply lump sum. It is highly possible that by including more industries and by converting non-sales based royalty payments into sales-based ones, the number of observations can be dramatically increased such that the analysis will be more comprehensive and reliable. Such a research effort will be able to reveal more than what has been possible from this paper and lead to more robust and reliable conclusions on the 25 percent rule. 


References
Battersby, Gregory J. and Grimes, Charles W., Licensing Royalty Rates, 2001 Edition, Aspen Law and Business, New York, 2001.
Degnan, Stephen A. and Horton, Corwin, “A Survey of Licensed Royalties,” les Nouvelles, June 1997, 91-96.
Goldscheider, Jarosz, and Mulhern, “Use of the 25 Per Cent Rule in Valuing IP,” les Nouvelles, December 2002, 123-133.
Goldscheider, Robert, Technology Management: Law/Tactics/Forms, West Group, St. Paul, MN, 2001.
Granstrand, Ove, “Fair and Reasonable Royalty Rate Determination – When is the 25% Rule Applicable?” les Nouvelles, September 2006, 179-181.
Hagelin, Ted, “Valuation of Patent Licenses,” Texas Intellectual Property Law Journal, Vol. 12, 2004, 423-441.
“Industry Royalty Rate Data Summary,” Licensing Economics Review, Vol. 6, December 2007, 6-7.
Jousma, Harmen, “Considering Pharmaceutical Royalties,” les Nouvelles, June 2005, 65-77.
Parr, Russell L., Intellectual Property Infringement Damages: A Litigation Support Handbook, 2nd Edition, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Somerset, NJ, 1999.
Parr, Russell L., Royalty Rates for Licensing Intellectual Property, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, 2007.
Razgaitis, Richard, “Chapter 2: Technology Valuation,” in The LESI Guide to Licensing Best Practices: Strategic Issues and Comtemporary Realities, Edited by Robert Goldscheider, John Wily and Sons, Inc., New York, 2002.
Razgaitis, Richard, Early Stage Technologies: Valuation and Pricing, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1999.
Smith, Gordon V. and Parr, Russell L., Intellectual Property: Licensing and Joint Venture Proft Strategies, 3rd Edition, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, 2004.
Smith, Gordon V. and Parr, Russell L., Valuation of Intellectual Property and Intangible Assets, 3rd Edition, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 2000.


Appendix
Industry classifcation:
RoyaltySource system vs. SIC code
RoyaltySource classifcation 4-digit SIC codes # of companies
Automotive 3710-3716 96
Chemicals 2800-2824 2840-3089 316
Computer and offce equipment 3570-3579 155
Consumer goods, retail and
leisure
2300-2399 2500-2519 3100-3199 3630-3639 3650-3652 3900-3999 204
Electrical and electronics 3600 3640-3648 3670-3671 3675-3699 126
Energy and environment 1200-1389 3510-3519 3533 3610-3629 395
Food processing 2000-2099 154
Internet and software 7370-7375 712
Machines and tools 3500 3520-3532 3534-3569 3580-3599 3800-3829 3860-3873 380
Media and entertainment 2710-2741 4830-4841 7810-7819 157
Medical and health products 3840-3851 245
Pharmaceuticals and 2830-2836 555
biotechnology
Semiconductors 3672-3674 206
Telecom (excluding media) 3660-3669 186
Grand total 3887



Contact us
Global Leader
Doug McPhee
Tel: +44 20 7311 8524
doug.mcphee@kpmg.co.uk

Country Leaders
Argentina
Gabriel G. Taira
Tel: +54 11 4891 5606
gtaira@kpmg.com.ar

Australia
Ian Jedlin
Tel: +61 (2) 9335 8207
ijedlin@kpmg.com.au

Austria
Klaus Mittermair
Tel: +43 732 6938 2151
kmittermair@kpmg.at

Bahamas
Simon Townend
Tel: +1 242 393 2007
stownend@kpmg.com.bs

Bahrain and Qatar
CN Ramachandran
Tel: +973 17 224 807
nramachandran@kpmg.com

Barbados
Lisa Taylor
Tel: +1 246 434 3900
lisataylor@kpmg.bb

Belgium*
Jorn de Neve
Tel: +32 2 708 4778
jdeneve@kpmg.com

Brazil
Cláudio Ramos
Tel: +55 11 3245 8313
crramos@kpmg.com.br

Canada
Susan H. Glass
Tel: +1 416 777 3315
susanglass@kpmg.ca

China/Hong Kong
Janet Cheung
Tel: +852 2140 2818
janet.cheung@kpmg.com

Czech Republic
Jaromir Horejsi
Tel: +420 222 123 128
jhorejsi@kpmg.cz

Finland
Mikko Palmu
Tel: +358 20 760 3405
mikko.palmu@kpmg.f

France
Jean-Florent Rerolle
Tel: +33 1 5568 8666
jrerolle@kpmg.fr

Germany*
Gertraud Dirscherl
Tel: +49 89 9282 1200
gdirscherl@kpmg.com

Dr Marc Castedello
Tel: +49 89 9282 1145
mcastedello@kpmg.com

Greece
Athanasios Tsotsoros
Tel: +30 210 6052121
atsotsoros@kpmg.gr

Hungary
Andrea Sartori
Tel: +36 18 877 215
andrea.sartori@kpmg.hu

Iceland
Benedikt Magnússon
Tel: +354 545 6236
bmagnusson@kpmg.is

India
Nandini Chopra
Tel: +91 (22) 3090 2603
nandinichopra@kpmg.com

Ireland
Steven Spillane
Tel: +353 1 410 1276
steven.spillane@kpmg.ie

Israel
Avivit Ben-simchon
Tel: +972 3 684 8000
aben-simchon@kpmg.com

Italy
Simone Maurizio
Tel: +39 02 6764 31
smaurizio@kpmg.it

Jamaica
Raymond Campbell
Tel: +1 876 922 6640
raymondcampbell@kpmg.com.jm

Japan
Takako Iwata
Tel: +81 3 5218 6704
takako.iwata@jp.kpmg.com

Korea
Ho Seung (Henry) Son
Tel: +82 (2) 2112 0717
hson@kr.kpmg.com

Kuwait*
Anindya Roychowdhury
Tel: +965 2247 5090
anindyaroychowdhury@kpmg.com

Luxembourg*
Yves Courtois
Tel: +352 22 51 51 7503
yves.courtois@kpmg.lu

Malaysia
Ooi Woon Chee
Tel: +603 2095 3388
wooncheeooi@kpmg.com.my

Mexico
Federico Hernandez
Tel: +52 55 5246 8620
federicohernandez@kpmg.com.mx

Netherlands*
Jeroen Weimer
Tel: +31 20 656 7469
weimer.jeroen@kpmg.nl

New Zealand
Justin Ensor
Tel: +64 9 367 5934
jmensor@kpmg.co.nz

Nigeria
Kunle Elebute
Tel: +234 1 271 0534
kunle.elebute@ng.kpmg.com

Norway*
Håkon Stensrud
Tel: +47 40 63 92 85
hakon.stensrud@kpmg.no

Philippines
Michael Arcatomy Guarin
Tel: +63 (2) 885 7000 ext: 347
mguarin@kpmg.com

Poland
Tomasz Wisniewski
Tel: +48 22 528 12 19
twisniewski@kpmg.pl

Portugal
Jose Silva
Tel: +351 21 011 01 60
jlsilva@kpmg.com

Romania
Adrian Vascu
Tel: +40 372 377 884
avascu@kpmg.ro

Russia and the CIS*
John Kallaway
Tel: +7 (495) 7716 457 ext:14120
jkallaway@kpmg.ru

Saudi Arabia*
Islam Al Bayaa
Tel: +966 1 874 8707
ialbayaa@kpmg.com

Singapore
Vishal Sharma
Tel: +65 6213 2845
vishalsharma@kpmg.com.sg

South Africa
Neeraj Shah
Tel: +27 11 647 7825
neeraj.shah@kpmg.co.za

Spain*
Ana Martinez Ramon
Tel: +34 91 456 34 70
amartinezr@kpmg.es

Sweden
Martin Ericsson
Tel: +46 (8) 7239829
martin.ericsson@kpmg.se

Switzerland*
Johannes Post
Tel: +41 44 249 23 74
jpost@kpmg.com

Thailand
Kasemsarn Tanate
Tel: +66 2677 2750
tanate@kpmg.co.th

Turkey*
Hande Senova
Tel: +90 21 2317 7400 ext: 445
hsenova@kpmg.com

UAE
Elias Daou
Tel: +971 2 401 4867
edaou@kpmg.com

United Kingdom*
Heather Gray
Tel: +44 20 7311 8578
heather.gray@kpmg.co.uk

United States
Jordan Lamm
Tel: +1 312 665 2263
jlamm@kpmg.com

Vietnam
Franz Degenhardt
Tel: +84 8 3821 9266 ext: 8713
franzdegenhardt@kpmg.com.vn

* Part of KPMG Europe LLP
kpmg.com/socialmedia kpmg.com/app

The information contained herein is of a general nature and is not intended to address the circumstances of any particular individual or entity. Although we endeavor to provide accurate and timely information, there can be no guarantee that such information is accurate as of the date it is received or that it will continue to be accurate in the future. No one should act on such information without appropriate professional advice after a thorough examination of the particular situation.

Any trademarks identifed in this publication are the property of their respective owner(s).

© 2012 KPMG International Cooperative (“KPMG International”), a Swiss entity. Member frms of the KPMG network of independent frms are affliated with  KPMG International. KPMG International provides no client services. No member frm has any authority to obligate or bind KPMG International or any other  member frm vis-à-vis third parties, nor does KPMG International have any such authority to obligate or bind any member frm. All rights reserved.

The KPMG name, logo and “cutting through complexity” are registered trademarks or trademarks of KPMG International.

Designed by Evalueserve. Publication name: Proftability and royalty rates across industries: Some preliminary evidence.
Publication number: 120985. Publication date: November 2012
