
Halotechnics - This example of a product development agreement between start Halotechnics and a corporate partner provides a structure and legal language to allow both partners to enter into a commercial collaboration with the corporation paying the startup NRE fees. 

Credit: [Halotechnics](http://www.halotechnics.com)

 
{! search-content: !}

PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
This Product Development Agreement (this “Agreement”) is entered into as _____________, 20__ (the “Effective Date”) by and between __________________, with offices located at ___________________________________ (“Customer”), and _______________________, a __________________ corporation, with offices located at ___________________________________ (together with its subsidiaries, “Developer”).  Developer  and the Customer are each referred to herein as a “Party” and collectively as the “Parties.”  
WHEREAS, Developer  develops, manufactures and sells ______________________; and
WHEREAS, Customer and Developer  desire to collaborate on a product definition to enable Developer  to create and sell to Customer an ______________  that meets certain product specifications and performance requirements;
NOW, THEREFORE in consideration of the foregoing and the following mutual promises, conditions and covenants, Customer and Developer  agree as follows:
1.	Product Development.  For purposes of this Agreement, “Product Development” shall mean the product development activities of the Parties as further described herein.  Developer  shall develop and own an _________ that meets the product specifications and milestones set forth on Schedule A hereto (the “Product”).  The product specifications and milestones may be changed only by written agreement of the Parties.  Customer acknowledges that the _____________ development process has inherent uncertainties and that Developer  cannot predict with certainty the timing of the development process or delivery of deliverables.  The times for performance stated in the product specifications and milestones schedule are accordingly only an estimate.  
	The Customer agrees that it shall use all deliverables hereunder for testing purposes only.  The Customer will not sell, deliver or make any such deliverables available to any third party without Developer ’s prior express written permission.
The Product and all Intellectual Property rights therein and thereto shall be owned exclusively by Developer .  The Customer acknowledges that Developer ’s business is developing ___________ and therefore Developer  shall be the exclusive owner of and reserves the right to use all technology owned and/or developed by Developer  including, but not limited to, all cells, simulation tools, process technology, design processes, fabrication processes, procedures, algorithms, routines, methods, architecture and techniques.

Except as otherwise expressly set forth herein or as agreed upon in writing, nothing in this Agreement shall restrict either Party’s right to engage in research and development activities similar to the Product Development either on its own or with third parties, subject to the confidentiality and intellectual property restrictions set forth herein.

2.	NRE Payments.  As part of the Product Development, Customer shall pay to Developer  non-recurring engineering fees (the “NRE Payments”) in accordance with Schedule B hereto.  The NRE Payments are non-refundable.  Except for the NRE Payments, each Party shall bear its own costs and expenses in connection with the Product Development.
3.	Customer Sales.  The Parties anticipate that Customer and Developer  will enter into a separate mutual written agreement pursuant to which Customer shall purchase certain quantities of the Product from Developer  for commercial use.  Nothing contained herein shall obligate either Party to enter into any purchase or other agreement.
4.	Intellectual Property Rights.
4.1.	Definitions.  As used in this Agreement, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
(A)	“Background Intellectual Property” of a Party shall mean Intellectual Property existing as of the Effective Date or developed outside the scope of this Agreement that is owned by such Party or that such Party has the right to sublicense without paying additional fees to a third party.
(B)	 “Improvement” shall mean any upgrade, new version, adaptation, change, redesign, improvement, derivative work or modification.  
(C)	“Intellectual Property” shall mean (a) patents and Patent Applications; (b) trademarks, service marks, trade dress, Internet domain names, logos, trade names and corporate names and registrations and applications for registration thereof; (c) copyrights and registrations and applications for registration thereof; (d) computer software, data and documentation; (e) inventions, trade secrets and confidential business information, whether patentable or nonpatentable and whether or not reduced to practice, know-how, manufacturing and product processes and techniques, research and development information, copyrightable works, financial, marketing and business data, pricing and cost information, business and marketing plans and customer and supplier lists and information; (f) any other intellectual property or proprietary right; and (g) copies and tangible embodiments thereof.
(D)	“Joint Intellectual Property” shall mean Intellectual Property that is conceived jointly (under U.S. law of inventorship) by Developer  and Customer as part of the Product Development.
(E)	“Patent Application” shall mean a provisional, parent, divisional, continuation, continuation-in-part, and/or any other U.S. or foreign application that can claim priority to an originally-filed patent application under applicable U.S. or foreign patent law.  
(F)	“Product Intellectual Property” shall mean all Intellectual Property embodied in or related to the Product, regardless of when created or the party or parties that conceived it, other than Background Intellectual Property.
4.2.	No Licenses.  Except as otherwise expressly set forth herein, no license or right is hereby granted, by implication, estoppel, or otherwise, by either Party, and nothing in this Agreement shall give either Party any right to make, have made, use or sell any developments or products that incorporate the other Party’s Background Intellectual Property without express separate mutual written agreement of the Parties.
4.3.	Background Intellectual Property. Each Party shall exclusively own all of its Background Intellectual Property, and the other Party shall obtain no ownership, property or other rights or entitlements therein, except as expressly set forth herein.  Each Party hereby grants the other Party a worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive license (without the right to sublicense) to use such Party’s Background Intellectual Property during the Term solely to further the Product Development and the transactions contemplated by this Agreement.  Customer hereby grants to Developer  a worldwide, irrevocable, royalty-free, sublicensable right and license to use, copy, modify and create derivative works of any Customer Background Intellectual Property embodied in or related to the Product, and to make, have made, use, import, offer to sell, sell and support any product (including the Product) containing any such Customer Background Intellectual Property.    
4.4.	Product Intellectual Property.  Developer  shall exclusively own all Product Intellectual Property and all rights therein and thereto, and Customer shall have no ownership, property or other rights or entitlements therein or thereto, except as expressly set forth herein.  Customer shall assign, and does hereby assign, to Developer  all of Customer’s present and future right, title and interest in all Product Intellectual Property and all rights therein.  Customer agrees to execute, acknowledge, deliver and file any and all documents reasonably required by Developer  from time to time to vest in Developer  all rights under this Section 4.4 or for Developer  to obtain, perfect, confirm or enforce any such rights.  
4.5.	Intellectual Property Patent Prosecution.  Each Party shall have the exclusive right and option to file and prosecute any Patent Applications, and to maintain any patents, covering such Party’s Background Intellectual Property.  Developer  shall have the exclusive right and option to file and prosecute any Patent Applications, and to maintain any patents, covering any Product Intellectual Property.  Each Party shall bear its own costs and expenses in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining and extending its patent rights.   
4.6.	Licenses Back.  Developer  hereby grants to Customer a worldwide, irrevocable, royalty-free license to modify, create derivative works of, make, have made, use, import, offer to sell and sell any Improvements that Developer  makes to Customer’s Background Intellectual Property in the course of the Product Development.  Customer hereby grants to Developer  a worldwide, irrevocable, royalty-free license to modify, create derivative works of, make, have made, use, import, offer to sell and sell any Improvements that Customer makes to Developer ’s Background Intellectual Property or Product Intellectual Property in the course of the Product Development.
4.7.	Joint Intellectual Property.  All Joint Intellectual Property, if any, shall be jointly owned by Developer  and Customer, without any obligation of accounting to the other Party.  For purposes of clarity, nothing in this Agreement shall imply that any Joint Intellectual Property will be created or incorporated into the Product.
4.8.	No Reverse Engineering.  Neither Party shall disassemble, dismantle, redesign or reverse engineer any Confidential Information (as defined in Section 7 below) of the other Party unless expressly permitted by such other Party in writing from time to time.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, any Improvements developed by a Party (the “Breaching Party”) as a result of actions in breach of this Section 4.8 shall be owned by the Party that owns the item that was disassembled, dismantled, redesigned or reverse engineered.  Each Breaching Party agrees to execute such documentation to assign and/or evidence such ownership as is reasonably required by the other Party from time to time.
5.	Representations and Warranties.  In addition to any other representations and warranties expressly set forth herein, each Party represents and warrants to the other Party that (i) such Party has the full power and authority to enter into and perform this Agreement and to carry out the transactions contemplated by this Agreement, (ii) the execution and performance of this Agreement will not violate any applicable statute, rule or regulation to which the warranting Party is subject, or conflict with, result in a breach of, or constitute a default under any agreement to which such Party is a party; and (iii) the warranting Party has obtained all necessary approvals to enter into this Agreement and to perform its obligations hereunder.
6.	Disclaimer of Warranties; Limitation of Liability.  Developer  MAKES NO EXPRESS WARRANTIES AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIMS ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION WARRANTIES OF NON-INFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, WITH RESPECT TO THE DELIVERABLES HEREUNDER, ALL OF WHICH ARE PROVIDED TO THE CUSTOMER “AS IS.”
IN NO EVENT SHALL EITHER PARTY BE LIABLE FOR SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, EXEMPLARY, PUNITIVE, MULTIPLE OR OTHER INDIRECT DAMAGES, OR FOR LOSS OF PROFITS, LOSS OF DATA OR LOSS OF USE DAMAGES, ARISING OUT OF THIS AGREEMENT, WHETHER BASED UPON WARRANTY, CONTRACT, TORT, STRICT LIABILITY OR OTHERWISE, EVEN IF SUCH PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES OR LOSSES.  THE TOTAL LIABILITY OF Developer  TO CUSTOMER AND/OR ANY THIRD PARTY FROM ANY LAWSUIT, CLAIM, WARRANTY OR INDEMNITY UNDER THIS AGREEMENT SHALL NOT EXCEED THE AGGREGATE AMOUNT ACTUALLY PAID BY CUSTOMER TO Developer  PURSUANT TO SECTION 2 OF THIS AGREEMENT
7.	Confidentiality.  The Parties have entered into a Mutual Non-Disclosure Agreement dated __________________________ (the “NDA”), the terms of which are incorporated herein by reference except for the termination provisions thereof and as otherwise provided herein.  For the avoidance of doubt, the existence and terms of this Agreement and the relationship of the Parties constitutes Confidential Information under the NDA.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein or in the NDA, the obligations to protect Confidential Information set forth herein shall survive any termination of this Agreement or the NDA.  In the event of any conflict between any provision of the NDA that is incorporated herein and any other provision of this Agreement, the other provision of this Agreement shall control.
8.	Term and Termination.
8.1.	Term; Events of Termination.  This Agreement shall commence on the Effective Date and continue in effect until the date that Developer  completes the product development and meets all the milestones set forth on Schedule A (the “Development Completion Date”), unless sooner terminated pursuant to this Section 8 (the “Term”).  This Agreement may be terminated:
(i)	upon mutual written agreement of the Parties;
(ii)	by either Party for any or no reason upon 60 days notice to the other Party; 
(iii)	by either Party immediately upon notice to the other Party and a 30-day cure period in the event of a material default or breach of such other Party’s obligations or responsibilities under this Agreement;
(iv)	by either Party immediately if the other Party (a) has filed against it any petition under any bankruptcy or similar laws which is not discharged within 30 days of said filing; (b) makes a filing under any bankruptcy or similar laws; (c) becomes insolvent; or (d) makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors; or
(v)	by Developer  if, in Developer ’s judgment, the Product cannot be manufactured to meet the product specifications and milestones schedule or will result in undue development expense or technical risk.  
8.2.	Effects of Termination.  Without limiting any rights under this Agreement or at law, in the event of:
(i)	any termination of this Agreement by Developer  pursuant to clause (ii) or clause (v) of Section 8.1 above or by the Customer pursuant to clause (iii) of Section 8.1 above, then Developer  shall repay to the Customer that portion of the NRE Payments received by Developer  pursuant to this Agreement that Developer  has not yet expended or committed to expend, as reasonably determined by Developer , and Developer  shall not be entitled to receive any then-unpaid NRE Payments; and
(ii)	any termination of this Agreement by the Customer pursuant to clause (ii) of Section 8.1 above or by Developer  pursuant to clause (iii) or clause (iv) of Section 8.1 above, then the Customer shall immediately pay the full amount of NRE Payments set forth on Schedule B hereto.  
9.	Miscellaneous. 
9.1.	Entire Agreement; Amendments.  This Agreement is the complete and exclusive agreement between the Parties with respect to the subject matter hereof, and supersedes and cancels any previous or contemporaneous agreements or understandings, whether oral, written or implied, between the parties relating to the subject matter hereof.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the NDA shall remain in full force and effect in accordance with its terms.  No amendment or modification may be made to this Agreement except by a writing signed by an authorized representative of each Party.
9.2.	Relationship of the Parties.  Nothing herein shall be construed to imply a joint venture, partnership or agency relationship between the Parties.  Personnel supplied by either Party will be deemed employees of such Party and will not for any purpose be considered employees or agents of the other Party.  Each Party shall be solely responsible for the supervision, daily direction and control of its employees and payment of their salaries (including withholding of appropriate payroll taxes), workers’ compensation, disability and other benefits.  Neither Party shall have any right to enter into any contracts or commitments on behalf of the other Party without such other Party’s prior written consent.  In the event that either Party engages an independent contractor in connection with the Product Development, such Party shall in all instances remain responsible for the activities of such independent contractor with respect to this Agreement.
9.3.	No Set-Off.  Undisputed amounts owed by the Customer hereunder shall be paid without set-off for any amounts which the Customer may claim are owed by Developer  and regardless of any controversies or disputes.
9.4.	Notices.  All notices required or permitted under this Agreement will be in writing.  Notices will be deemed given when actually received.  All communications will be sent to the following contacts: 
If to Customer:
							With a duplicate copy to:
_______________				_______________
_______________				_______________
_______________				_______________			
Attention:					Attention: 

If to Developer :
							With a duplicate copy to:
_______________				_______________
_______________				_______________			
Attention:					Attention: 

Either Party may change its address for purposes of this Agreement by furnishing written notice to the other Party in accordance with the terms of this Section 9.4.
9.5.	Severability.  If any provision of this Agreement, or the application thereof, shall for any reason and to any extent be determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining provisions of this Agreement shall be interpreted so as best to reasonably effect the intent of the Parties.  The Parties further agree to replace any such invalid or unenforceable provisions with valid and enforceable provisions designed to achieve, to the extent possible, the business purposes and intent of such invalid and unenforceable provisions.
9.6.	Governing Law; Venue.  This Agreement shall be construed and governed according to, and any judicial or arbitral proceeding relating hereto shall apply, the laws of the _________________ USA, excluding: (i) its conflicts of laws principles; (ii) the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods; (iii) the 1974 Convention on the Limitation Period in the International Sale of Goods; and (iv) the Protocol amending the 1974 Convention, done at Vienna April 11, 1980.  Any litigation relating to this Agreement shall be initiated and conducted in the state or federal courts of Middlesex County or Suffolk County, Massachusetts, and the parties irrevocably and unconditionally consent to the exclusive jurisdiction of such courts.
9.7.	Export Compliance.  The Products and deliverables hereunder are subject to the export control laws and regulations of the United States and/or other national governments, including, but not limited to, the U.S. Export Administration Regulations (US EAR), the U.S. State Department's International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR), sanction regimes of the U.S. Department of Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) and export laws and regulations of the European Union (EU) and/or any of its member states.  The Customer shall comply with these laws and regulations, and shall not, without prior U.S. Government authorization, export, reexport, or transfer any commodities, software or technology, either directly or indirectly, to any country subject to a U.S. trade embargo or sanction or to any resident or national of said countries, or to any person, organization, or entity on any of the restricted parties lists maintained by the U.S. Departments of State, Treasury or Commerce.  In addition, any Products and deliverables hereunder may not be exported, reexported or transferred to any end user engaged in activities, or for any end use, directly or indirectly related to the design, development, production, use or stockpiling of weapons of mass destruction (e.g., nuclear, chemical or biological weapons, and the missile technology to deliver them) without the appropriate U.S. export authorization.  The Customer shall not export or disclose any Confidential Information or any other information disclosed hereunder outside of the United States or to any foreign national or representative of any foreign government (whether or not outside the United States or to an employee of the Customer) in a manner that is not in compliance with the export controls of the U.S. Government. These obligations shall survive past the term or termination of this agreement.
9.8.	No Waiver.  No waiver or failure to exercise any option, right or privilege under the terms of this Agreement by either of the Parties hereto on any occasion or occasions shall be construed to be a waiver of the same on any other occasion or of any other option, right or privilege.
9.9.	Headings.  The headings and captions used in this Agreement are used for convenience only and are not to be considered in construing or interpreting this Agreement.
9.10.	Successors and Assigns.  This Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the Parties and their respective heirs, successors and permitted assigns.  Neither Party shall assign or otherwise transfer its rights and obligations under this Agreement except with the prior written consent of the other Party; provided that Developer  may assign or transfer this Agreement (i) to an affiliate of Developer  or (ii) in connection with the sale or other transfer of all or substantially all of the assets or business of Developer , or the line of business to which this Agreement relates, whether by merger, sale of stock or assets, reorganization, consolidation or other change of control transaction, provided that the acquiring party agrees in writing to be bound by the terms and conditions of this Agreement.  Any prohibited attempted assignment shall be null and void and shall constitute a material breach of this Agreement.
9.11.	Equitable Relief.  Each Party acknowledges that any breach of the confidentiality or intellectual property rights provisions of this Agreement may cause the non-breaching party irreparable injury, for which the award of damages would not be adequate compensation.  Consequently, the non-breaching Party may institute an action to enjoin the breaching Party from any and all acts in violation of those provisions, which remedy shall be cumulative and not exclusive, and a Party may seek entry of an injunction enjoining any breach or threatened breach of those provisions, in addition to any other relief to which the non-breaching Party may be entitled at law or in equity.  Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, no remedy granted to either Party herein shall be exclusive of any other remedy, and each remedy shall be cumulative with every other remedy herein or now or hereafter existing at law, in equity, by statute or otherwise.  
9.12.	Force Majeure.  Neither Party shall be liable for delay in performance or failure to perform in whole or in part the terms of this Agreement due to strike, labor dispute, act of war, terrorist act, labor shortage, riot or civil commotion, act of public enemy, fire, earthquake, flood or act of God or other cause beyond the control of such Party.
9.13.	Survival.  The provisions of Sections 4, 6, 7, 8.2 and 9 shall survive the termination, cancellation or expiration of this Agreement.
9.14.	Counterparts.  This Agreement may be executed in any number of counterparts, whether by original or facsimile, each of which shall be deemed an original but all of which together shall constitute one and the same instrument.
* * * * *
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties hereto have caused this Product Development Agreement to be executed in their names by their duly authorized officers or representatives as of the Effective Date.
[DEVELOPER]	[CUSTOMER] 
By:						
Name:
Title:	By:						
Name:  
Title:  

 
SCHEDULE A
Product Specifications and Milestones


 
SCHEDULE B
NRE Payments

