David Merkoski, Partner and COO at Greentstart, returns to give an update version of his 2012 ARPA-E Summit talk on telling better stories. His presentation is 30 minutes, featuring a case study with Greenstart alumni Ridepal, and is followed by 30 minutes of Q&A with the webinar audience.

Credit: [David Merkoski](http://www.greenstart.com/)

{! search-content: !}

Telling Your Story: Effective Presentation Techniques [ARPA-E University]

Thanks for having me Adam and all the folks at arpa-e. it was great to do this talk earlier this year. it's great to give it again with some updates and changes and also to have knack for you with me here from ride pal to put it into practice and talk about how we use some of the exercises around storytelling and give you a little bit more sort of credibility in detail about how those how those function.
this talk is about telling your story and so I'm going to assume the most of the folks here the participants on the line have a story to tell or maybe you just want to be told a good story and that's why you're here. so either way I'm going to start by actually telling someone else's story this was the story told by my four-year-old when looks like this, he's the one there on the left, so there's a very early moment in storytelling istory. and here's this story once upon a time the end and it made us all laugh. and it made me laugh in particular because it kind of discovered an essential feature of stories at that age which is they have frames. all stories are framed. how do we learn this? where do we learn this? 
you know we discover sounds and then words and language. and that's the path to discovering that there are these things called stories. and they have structured. and we're all familiar with the idea of a beginning, middle and end, but the real question I
 have is we all want to hear a story but how did we learn to tell them? well for most of us we learn to tell stories from listening to people who tell stories. that could be our parents, could be our grandparents, a teacher or a mentor. someone we either had to listen to or maybe wanted to listen to because at some point all of us have been captivated, spellbound, hooked by a story. and we learned to tell the story that is frame them just like they did. we copied and pasted their techniques without even knowing it, and that's what was going on with my four-year-old with once upon a time the end yet figured out that essential frame. so we want to have the same power we want to tell our own story.
the problem is today the most powerful storyteller isn't really even a person at all. in our Google+, blog, Yelp, wordpress, Facebook, tweeting lives, were under a tidal wave of stories. an unprecedented volume of new stories washes over us every single day. were over indexed in storytelling and storytellers. we have become to think that we are great storytellers because we see so many stories. so if you want to tell your story and if you're in this room and on this call that I think you do, then you're going to have to tell better stories and you're going to have to tell your stories better. so that's what I'm here to talk about is telling your stories.
I'm going to do this in 10 slides, followed by three techniques and then we'll talk about right pal, the case study.
ok so that was me telling you I'm going to tell you a story. that's stage A, that's sort of the Once Upon a Time moments, of the in a galaxy far far away. stage A of telling a story is tell them  you're going to tell a story. always start a story by telling them you're going to tell a story. it can take just a second. we could take longer too. for instance, here's what my research is about. or my companies for work my company's vision for world domination, I'm glad you asked. it's a way to basically engage your audience before you actually tell your story. you want to create space for that story to take place. you want to create that frame. you want to make it clear that there is in fact a frame before you talk about what's inside that frame. you want to signal you're going to tell that story. Something like dimming the lights in a movie theater or turning up the music at a concert. it allows your audience's imagination to open up and be somewhere else. so that's the first part about telling a story, stage A, tell them you're going to tell a story.
now let's talk about the actual story. you know a lot of people talk about things like unique value proposition or talking points or marketing messaging and and that's all very important stuff to understand, how to sort of tell your story particularly in a business context. but before we even get to any of that kind of stuff, the meat and potatoes, I want to talk about how you get there. how do you actually find what it is you want to tell your story about. and to do that we practice an exercise here at greenstart and my former company frogs called the hook. now remember when I said stories are these kind of incredibly important things people get hooked by, spellbound, entranced by. the hook is the actual sticky bit. it's the thing you kind of hang your hat on, the thing that your audience can grab onto. and to do that you need to find something that's real and tangible. because we live in a complex world of ideas and abstractions and processes, it's hard to find what the story is if there's nothing being said. so the book is an internal activity to identify the nouns and the verbs or the objects and the actions of your story. for those of you starting a business it could sound like the unique value proposition. but the point is it's not dressed up in pretty language. it can seem easy at first, you can look at this and say oh I totally know how to do that for my product, for my research, for my idea. when you actually go through the activity and exercise, we're going to ask not to talk about that in just a second, you'll find it's much harder than you first thought. because it's about words and again we're all such good storytellers we think we're all such good storytellers from seeing so many stories, that we get caught up in marketing and tag lines and branding. that is to say, things like adjectives and adverbs. so the important thing here is to focus on nouns and verbs.
let me take you to a couple examples and then we'll talk to Nat, get some examples from her about her process, of going through that and then we'll come back and talk about how you actually use the results of the hook. so the first example we're going to do is 9Nissan and in particular we're going to talk about their car the Nissan Leaf. here's their hook: drivers don't need gasoline. that's it, it doesn't get more complex than that. it's not cars don't need gas. it's not drivers don't need fuel. it's not keeping drivers away from gasoline. and most importantly, it's not saving the world or going green things, that you might see on advertisements, marketing slogans, websites, etc, because remember this is an internal clarifying tool. it is not how you publicly tell your story. once you have your hook once you internally, as an organization or as a group or team, agree on what the nouns and the verbs, the basic option objects and actions are, then you can dress it up in a thousand different ways.
here's an example of that from Nissan: "what if everything ran on of gas? then again what if everything didn't? to 100% electric 0 gas nissan, the innovation for the planet innovation".
so that's a great example of breaking down the essence of what story you're trying to communicate first and then bringing it forward into something much more expressive. and we're going to talk about things like metaphor and analogy and repetition. all techniques is used in the actual telling of the story, after they first arrived at what the essential message is. 
let's do another example, you know I know a lot of folks on this call are very much on this road of scientific side, the research and development, looking at things at a very deep level that require an immense amount of understanding, to even begin to understand what the breakthroughs are that you're developing. another way of saying that is that science doesn't have to be uncool. and I kind of want to show an example around how to do the exact same trick of the hook, this internal exercise around something that might seem a whole lot more complex and show how inside even science and basic deep research lies the same process for being able to tell your story more simply and constructively to an audience. 
so here is a headline, an article from Reuters, explaining a new scientific breakthrough. one of the great things about scientific journalism is it does a really good job of finding the hook for you and often publishing it that way because they can't help but figure it out themselves. so this headline roughly is the hook: "nanotechnology turns plants into common plastic now". if you were actually in this research team and you have been plugging away at this effort for years, if you were these Dutch scientists and you had your breakthrough, you might actually arrive at the hook that sounds more like this: "ethylene and propylene nano particles of iron catalysts that synthesize oil based fuel alternatives". that's not a hook. while it is full of nouns and verbs, you've got to take out your Occam's razor you've got to make things simpler, because simpler explanations are better than complex ones. so another way of looking at this same exact basic research is "plants turning into plastics". now plants isn't technically right, plastic isn't technically right either, and turning into isn't technically right either. but this again is not about being technically right, it's about getting the story tight not right. and if you can understand how to look at your research and your work and see it through the eyes of an audience that doesn't have a depth and understanding of what you've been experiencing, then you'll have a much better time of going through this exercise of the hook. 
just to give you a couple more examples and then we'll turn over to Nat and talk about the process. here are some other companies, other brands give you a sense of what i mean by basic language and nouns and actions nouns and verbs. 
facebook, it's a website that keeps relationships. does it do far more than that? absolutely! is there a marketing language they've developed that pushes far beyond this emotionally? absolutely! but is this the essential action of the story that that nouns and verbs they would be telling about themselves? it is.
Pinterest, one of the reasons it's so successful as a website was it's a lot like Facebook and you could say it's a facebook for your favorite things and that's because it does essentially the same thing when you tell a story about it. it's a website to keep your favorite things. gatorades, a drink to replenish energy. virgin america, airplanes that fly with style.
you can imagine on these last two very brand strong, sorry, very strong brands, you go lots of adjectives, lots of marketing language to express the story and in fact these two brands do that quite often and quite well. but before they do they have to arrive at the essential hook that binds all their stories together.
so now I'm going to invite Nat for you, founder and CEO of RidePal, talk to me today about the case study that we went through here at Greenstart to develop her hook. Nat, welcome. thanks for joining. 
thanks for having me. 
so the first thing I'm gonna ask before we get into is just basically give people sort of the pitch the description of what ride pal is, so that we can kind of talk about how we got there.
you mean very original pitch or the pitch now?
the very original pitch.
okay so the very original pitch was actually geared toward commuters themself and it was about having a better life, having the ability to use their commute time to themselves 
and maybe for the folks in the calls its more a description of what the company does 
and so the way right now was doing this was the same, even if you don't work at a large company like Google or Apple that have shuttles that are paid for by the company and they will carry you from home to work. right now I can provide the solution to you commuters because we can aggregate all of you commuters living from one place, arrange for a bus to pick you up from that one place near your home and take you to your workplace. and you all kind of work into any location 
so it's kind of like Google shuttle the way they work but now for everyone, all companies in all markets
correct 
cool 
and so talk to me about your original marketing language and sort of how you guys came to that on your own 
the way we came to this on our own was Regis by talking to people and just listening to their own problems. and like I said, we focused on the riders initially because we actually believed they were the one hurting most and it turns out that it wasn't necessarily true, and there were two components in this market, the companies and the riders. and riders were really telling us that what they didn't like about their commute was that it was a waste of time. they would spend a lot of time driving because there was no alternative and they couldn't do anything else while they were driving. and then the second thing that seemed to be most important to them was their quality of life was not very good. they felt tired, they felt stressed and most of it had to do with the fact that they were driving. so our marketing language was just saying, you know, these are your problems and RidePal can help you eliminate them.
cool. it's a very common approach right, you should identify what problems your audience has and then you tell a story in emotional language that draws that you are the solution to that problem. so now we're going to go through and we take a look at three iterations of the hook. and as I told you before it can seem like a simple process from the outset but it actually takes a lot of sort of mental grinding work to really get there. so the first one hook one talk to me about this.
so when we got to, you know, looking at the hook I think one thing that it forced us to do was to look at the actors our system because we were looking at the story from the riders' perspective and we also realized that these riders of these commuters had a relationship with our employers. and we probably could have done that before but because we were focusing only on one side of the problem we didn't get to that. and it's actually when we looked at the hook, one thing that, one question that came up is like who who is involved in that whole relationship those now just basic exactly know what order now right and initially when we just said the writers it just didn't seem right so this is actually when we started to do a lot more research like this hook process led us back to the marketplace and companies actually kind of first in terms of how much they were hurting and from their perspective meaning was getting in the way of hiring people and then keeping them so a first book actually completely left the riders out and use the very similar approach okay your company this is your problem so right that is a solution so we switch to the other side now and so then books to is interesting because now you're starting to try to balance the two by talking more about yourself exactly so what the the next general when we looked at this first row of like always we the way we're testing it was talking to everyone in the company that well does that represent what we do is that the problem that we're married to and and there was something there that was in settings because the first book was about writers that they can hook was about company so obviously the first comment yet from everyone at the company was like what about the writers now so that second who doesn't seem complete and so we've the challenges okay how do we marry the two and we said well the only one thing in the middle between the two is the company so let's talk about the company so next book was what do we do and what we do is just we take care of all of you know the commuting things that need to happen for companies to attract talent and commuters to live a better life so will be the program management for community right on there was a mixup and then hook 3 you sort of came back around so hook 3 we came back around and the reason for that was its again know what is so first of all let me step back we realized that really though it wasn't about the company the hook is about really the a problem or something that the company is really trying to do the hook was not a statement of identity of the company it was really a statement of the what the company was about the story you're trying to tell ya so we went away from the second hook and then we go to get well what is these other relationships that exist between these commuters and the companies what is what makes that work what solves the problem for both writers and the company and that was basically what people didn't have today which was a commune experience it could love that's right end of four witches so that was Odin is happy the next hook and then that leads us into something we'll talk about after this case study which is the power of metaphor because once you find a hook that works for you the real power of course is how you spin that into a story how you dress that up in marketing language and a great way to do that is to sort of think about metaphors and analogies to the kind of story you're trying to tell so talk to me about this moment that you had so this was actually part of the exercise that was very helpful because we're talking about marketing language we did pick one side even though the hope was marrying the two sides when we were addressing the marketplace when to dig an audience and talking to a company is a different conversation and talking to the writers so we as related the company part and the way we went about this was just searching for images and so we just entered some terms from the hook for the for the company so we actually went back to one of our previous hopes that was still very useful to us and we put you know attractive we put something around talent and we had a bunch of images that came up and then we're just steps next to these images and there's ok what seems to be the one that just you know seems to embody bath what is that we're trying to do and the one that really came out with like ultimately these companies need to retain this talent to stand out there competing in the marketplace of hiring and they need to stand out so they need something that makes them stand out and what a good benefit does and so that's what the image steps that came back was ok there is one flower in a field of seemingly identical flower that has to be the flower that was working with right now 6and so that's how we came up with that marketing language yes and it's entertainment there's no this image is metaphoric powerfully led to this idea of attracting right and that's the sort of unique flower and so and extracting was also then that you know we were looking for the definition of that relationship between the company and the writers and that is I think where we found out what that real relationship is right and so now the hook begins to mature into truly the public-facing marketing language and this is the first sort of step at that we provide hassle free world-class commuting services blah blah blah begin the main point here is adjectives are now being inserted words are becoming more dressed up it's not just basic nouns and actions now we're starting to get into it and this is a great the simplicity moment right is taking something as complex as that statement and essentially boiling it down and keeping the essence of what you discovered in that book into this recruit and retain the best talent it says nothing about shuttle buses nothing about transportation it's a message that both sides can resonate with particularly the company side and then what I love is ultimately where I can go right which is connecting bunch with seats which is a line that i think if i remember correctly sort of just generally used in the transportation industry is kind of like a joke is that right the bus we see putting busking to seek is a is a fish ille terminology in the transportation industry connecting bus we states was not used freitas exactly and so there is that attract there is that recruit and retain even boil down simpler and is just a basic word like connect but receipts and so it's possible to come back all the way from women to go backwards real quick here from reclaim your commute time for yourself and live a happier fill their life something which you know doesn't really say that much to something that we connect two bucket seats so much province's at playfulness of the brand as it was developing and it becomes more akin to what you've discovered in the hook which is the essential story that you're trying to tell that's right cool thank you so much that for your time for the case study well you know once you get this hooked down and you begin to express it into language the in marketing language in particular there are a couple techniques that you can use but i really want to focus on two to make sure that your story is stronger than just having a good line and that's one of those is repetition you know the great thing about repetition is repeating things accelerates their essence and i can't stress that point enough so i'll say it again repeating things accelerates their essence it's a way to tell the signal from the noise think about the I have a dream speech right you you keep hearing the refrain you keep hearing I have a dream might have a dream you know the it that you want to repeat again and again is the hook but again that's a private internal activities which is trying to get you as a way of dressing that thing up and so we've talked about a little bit here but what I want to talk about now is how do you get it to become a story how do you actually get take the essence of the idea the hook that you've developed and turn it into a story well story is the deep structure of being and I use the capital be there intentionally it's actually from heidegger's a little bit of a philosophy moment here but in being in time tiger says what is the being that will give access to the question of the meaning of being and I have no idea what that means and his answer of course is it can only be that being for whom the question of being is important to being of whom beating being matters the point is trying to make here is that stories are the deep structure it's how we hold on to the world it's an hour confusion in our dread of being capital B in this world that we fight against the dark that we push against that wilderness we tell stories to stay alive to stay warm and safe it's what we do before we dream they're not abstractions they really are how we engage with the world and there are two very profound techniques that we have at our disposal to engage the world at this level with our stories the truly a motive and deep connection that we can forge over a story the first is analogy you know Douglas Hofstadter has a great line analogy is the core of cognition analogy this is like that one thing is logically like another in part the car is like a horse and that's a very logical argument basic building blocks of making a logical argument is to use an analogy but we are as much effective creatures as we are cognitive we are both head and heart and if you want to  get to the level where story is that the deep structure of being you need to tell a good story to both and that's where metaphor comes in if analogy is this is like that logically then metaphor is this is that directly it's kind of almost like going from a laptop to an iPad where instead of tapping the buttons with a mouse and a keyboard at a distance you're doing it directly with your fingers metaphors or the iPads of storytelling so let me explain there's a conceptual theory of metaphor and it suggests that knowledge is structured around mappings in the brain derived directly from physical experience that  is when I use a metaphor I'm not appealing to your head and your cognition but your actual sentence eight abilities of touching smelling seeing things like that now there have been two camps on this one says when you hear a metaphor like I've had a rough day you only under Stan me because you've heard that metaphor so many times and you've learned that rough means abrasive and bad and so your brain is toggling quickly from one definition to the other the other camp says the brain calls on sensory experiences that it has stored such as what roughness actually feels like to understand the meaning of the metaphor now recent functional MRI studies on metaphors of texture and touch suggest that the right turn of phrase the right metaphor does in fact activate the brains sensory centers the researchers scan subjects brains as they listen to textual textual textural metaphors and their literal counterpart so he's wet behind the ears versus he's naive it was a hairy situation versus it was a challenging situation now both lit up the language processing centers of the brain right because we are hearing language and processing it but metaphor is also activated the regions of the brain involved in textures and touch and the same part of the brain does not light up when you listen to the literal versions so next time someone says PowerPoint is just words and pictures you can now also tell them it's touch texture if you use metaphors I mean it's pretty awesome if you think about it storytelling becomes a physical process like sticking your fingers into someone's brain and massaging their thoughts out and the best kind of massage that I have discovered is provocation and the best kinds of stories are provocations like I have a dream or most of the things that Steve Jobs famous for doing on as keynotes you're moving back and forth between two messages what is versus what if and that's just the position that difference between those two is causing you to try to resolve the answer to what is versus what if like a picture like this try to suggest what could be even if it's not actually possible so that storytelling in a way of thinking about it from deriving your basic hook your basic idea and then dressing it up in the language of either an analogy or more powerfully a metaphor to both head and heart effectively and cognitively communicate the idea that you came up with during the hook now to end this presentation I want to talk about three quick tips that have more to do with the discourse of storytelling that is how you actually perform the story not what the content of the story is the first one is your script think about how many presentations are going on right now beyond this one in schools laboratories clinics in Afghanistan in this building right now every one seemingly today uses some kind of visual aid or prop I don't know about your mom but mine didn't use PowerPoint but now my kids use PowerPoint it's important to understand presentation is both what happens on the screen and what comes out of your mouth that's the discourse now a lot of people write their script on the screen they confuse the map for the territory so here's your first tip don't do that don't write your script in PowerPoint write it in paper write it in a word processor write down the boss that you are trying to communicate first rather than trying to fit them into a template and even better for the people on this call who are very well practice whether in a research setting or a classroom setting of giving the same presentation again and again year after year to the same audience throw away that presentation start fresh with a script and think about your idea from the hook activity perspective think about the basic nouns and verbs first derive your message and then move backwards into dressing it up and you might arrive at an incredibly different story to tell put your script in your mouth where it belongs and that is off screen not on screen the second is improvisation knowing your material isn't good enough you need to make it appear that you know your material but that you're not stiff that you can react in real time even if you are the only one presenting you know there's a there's a game that goes on in most cities worldwide section event called pecha kucha and if you've ever been to one you'll know what I'm talking about started in Japan it's in every major city in the world it means chit chat and all it is is 20 images for 20 seconds long and then you have present click open mic night for presentations one great example or its or one great tip i can give you all is look for that in your city and and it's like that open mic night it's a little nerve-wracking but try it out go on stage with whatever your presentation is 20 images 20 seconds long for each image and try to give your talk to a very willing audience they'll give you great feedback and it allows you to improvise and learn the art of telling your story without sticking to your script and finally the last tip is three three is the magic number really it is and you should use it and when you're in doubt about how many things to name or list or choose on a slide it's three and why well because we have so much tied up in three beginning middle and thesis antithesis synthesis setups conflict resolution love triangles we expect three you should deliver on three it's what people are expecting course the great thing about three that you can then break it once you set it and so I'll say one more thing for tips and that is this idea of battle decks probably we did actually at arpa-e I think with great success very hard to explain on the phone much better to live it and feel it but what I can recommend is get a friend put together five images in a PowerPoint deck that you've never seen before and then give yourself two minutes in the mirror in a camcorder or two that friend to try to pitch or give a presentation or tell a story to those five images that you've never seen before the better that you can map what you're telling to the random images that are put on screen the more connected fluid and improvisational you will be with your story it's another rehearsing technique like improvisation only it's even stronger because it makes you realize how on or off message you are at any given moment depending on the circumstances so those are the three tips really for and that was me telling the story part b of the overall structure of how to tell a story I opened up by telling you I'm going to tell a story I then told you a story in this case about storytelling and now I'm going to do the thing you need to do to end the story to complete the frame of  the story and that's to tell you I just told you is you know my story because it's a story also has a structure and therefore also had a book and my basic nouns and verbs were story telling to an audience that's you I told you how to tell stories better I told you how to tell better stories things like analogies metaphors repetition provocation in the hook and so now it's time to raise the lights turn off the music finish the frame to close the story and bring it to an end because unlike once upon a time the end is the hardest part of telling a story you've got your audience to open up their minds to engage emotionally with you on the story they've believed ideally what it is you were trying to tell them and now you actually have to tell them it's over you have to make the magic go away and for most of the time nothing is final we're always kind of in the middle that's why closure so hard the project keep going the research keeps going the presentation may end but the conversation keeps going and with that I'll end on this presentation and turn the floor back over to our PE and I think Adam were along and ask if there's any questions that i can answer about this process the hook or otherwise great well thank you very much David and I really appreciate it as well Nats contribution and hearing her experience we do we have a fair number of folks on the line so if you've got your WebEx browser there look for the Q&A box notably not not the chat box with a Q&A box and you can put some questions and David if you see that box there they should they should come in beige well  what I was I gonna get off I'm sorry sorry yeah I got it up soon okay and but I'd like to start off this bike doing a couple things first off we had someone ask how did you how do you spell the pecha kucha or or maybe that's something that a bad spelling into Google can help us synthesized but I wanted to know about that yeah let me let me go ahead and make sure I get the correct spelling and i'll just type it into the Xu and a window there for everybody okay it's PE ch a que ucha and I can't send it in the Q&A window guess I can't ask myself a Q&A for the problem here you could oh wow you can put it into the chat yeah I'll put into the chat okay it will also send that around to everyone that's on the line as well and I wanted to ask I'm sorry I was going to happen to you I'll also add the URL in there as well so people can see which city is closest to them thank you perfect okay there we go so one question was thinking about the Viet essence of the story and talking about the what is versus the what is and what that struck me as something for particularly people who are working on it's something that might be pretty esoteric it might be a power electronic component that is is not something easily understood you know we have people especially here at our PE but but throughout the energy technology landscape that are working on a part of a balance of system but I just wanted to see especially in your experience I know three start made a transition from focusing on one portion of the energy technology world to another but if you had maybe just an experience with someone that sort of that struck me the idea of talking about so what is versus of what it could even really help something that at first you know seem like a very small component of a larger system to kind of bring out its magnitude in this impact yeah and there's a great presentation online at a TED conference by a woman named Nancy Duarte dua arte in which she went through and analyzed great speeches in history like Martin Luther King's I have a dream like Steve Jobs keynotes and many others that were familiar with specifically on the idea of provocation and and what you realize in her mapping is that what provocation is doing is something very similar to what we see in in preaching in motivational speaking and coaching which is generally to whip your audience up into a frenzy by constantly balancing in time the differences between what is and what could be so if you think about it what we're all engaged in particularly the audience to folks that the member that you just mentioned is we are trying to design solutions to problems right we have identified that there is a problem in the world and we are trying to design the solution for it dieter Elms bring designer once said design is an argument about the future and I think that's what provocation is most sort of credibly identified as is it's an argument about what could be and so when you're trying to express in a story what it is your solution to the problem that you've identified with you've identified then casting that as a provocation by saying not just what it is that I'm doing and here's its solution to the problem but what it is that I'm doing could lead to this kind of future it could be this kind of world that we live in I know the image that I showed there you could imagine what it would be like if we can all control our cars big and small alike by remote control now I could just focus on the idea if I was maybe the engineer behind that project i've created a wireless frequency modulator chip that allows me to insert it into any transportation it's like but then that's not really a story that's just basically describing the solution to the problem by casting your solution in context to the world we could be living in the argument for the future you'll much more likely engage your audience with the problem that you are solving and more specifically your solution because now they can grasp it they can put it into their own mind and if you do that with metaphor better than analogy but either then you'll do that even more emotionally right you'll appeal to their heart as much as they're ahead in the future that you're talking about in the argument that you are designing you know and what strikes me about that is is what NAT said about her process she said you know we got out there and we talked to people and we listen to how they describe their own problems which is a little reminiscent for those folks that were here for seedlings presentation his big secret sauce for building your business model was to get out and talk to customers and so it sounds like you know maybe for that for the technologists in the lab that you might have a good handle on the the ins and outs of the scientific challenges that you're working on but you might be framing those in a way that the end user might not describe their problem in the same way and so as you're saying to connect to the head in the heart with analogy that would be I'm sure you have some inch I'm sure you're the green start the companies that work with green star has some pretty wild experiences going out talking to their customers yeah maybe tell us a little bit about about green start we had one question come in asking you to elaborate how green start helps our PE RP green start helps other technology companies so there's the the friendships between David and our PE is is that exactly as a friendship there's no official partnership but just to give folks a little bit of an idea of what green start does and then yeah sure great we there is a little bit of an official partnership only in that we are a on the on the sunshot on the ue SunShot program so you know kind of cousins to some degree but but what green starts job is is to focus on work with startups in the digital clean tech space and so that's just basically thinking about traditional clean tech as we all understand it but that uses software in some fashion right so it could be the central business model or innovation is software it could be the distribution mechanism is software but really interested in kind of thinking that what happened to let's say mobile and happening right now so retail and transportation and happen to media what digital technology did to those industries it's going to do in some fashion to the energy or clean tech industry so we work with startups who are practicing or have products and services in that space and our job is essentially to make them better by telling better stories having better brands that tell those stories and most critically helping them design the products and services themselves and so that's everything from a mobile phone app to we recently like ride pal the who just meant literally talking about what is that shuttle experience what is it like when you get on what does it look like at the sign at the stops what is the online ticket buying process like so it's the full experience of what a product or service experience could be plus as i said the brand and also the storytelling the pitch itself so it's really kind of a a workshop environment for startups in that space excellent um 11 good question here is elaborating on how storytelling has changed or maybe changes depending on the communication tool you know and the person list a couple of different mediums in websites video podcasts and so I guess you especially with companies that sometimes you know today's presentation I think was focused on delivering it live you know the hook I guess process can feed into any different channel but any thoughts do you have on how the story should evolve as as you use different communication tools whether the websites video podcasts things like that absolutely I think it's really important to recognize that while your story will change depending upon the medium of its discourse that is to say whether it's PowerPoint or a movie or a forum like this which involves going to promote void the the two things are separate you really should try to understand what you're communicating as content or narrative and disk course right so there is the actual messages that you are trying to get across and the hook as one technique for doing that but then there is the actual discourse and all the kind of props that you use to tell that story and there is no best method in fact more often than not you're shoehorned into a discourse method right if you're talking to a venture capitalist they'll want to see a 15 slide deck or something like that if you're in the elevator then all you have is a one minute conversation right so more often than not it's not about choosing the best medium to tell your story but trying to find a consistency across all the mediums and keep your narrative your content your story so to speak as similar as possible across all of those and so while it's true that images and video and visually rich mediums will be more successful at the aspect of the emotional storytelling quality the same is true you can be as effective and emotionally engaging with just your voice in your body language and have to say that's something which a lot of the startups who come to green start are very surprised to not learn but but actually experience and discover because at the end of our program we have a sort of big pitch day where they get in front of about 300 investors and so it's very much their body language and their confidence the tonality the amount of pacing where you put your hands when you're talking all of that is equivalent to the slide the images that you might use in PowerPoint and many of us still either too confident or unable to ask for coaching there for help from our friends or professionals around that that discourse side of storytelling but it is as important if you want to tell an effective emotional story as the images that you might use as well so for me I'd say there's a lot more work we can all be doing on that side of discourse and worrying about whether or not I've got the right template for this slide that I'm showing great now that that is it's really helpful and I think also just emphasizes what might be painful advice to hear which is just yes you know it is practice practice practice and as a result one thing I want them very clearly no there isn't any kind of magic to any of this it really is more of a confidence game and the way that you can get there is just ask people who you trust you are closest to you friends family colleagues to participate with you in these activities you can't develop the hook on your own you will be trapped in your own mind and use your own words ask your mom in Estill Eamon to look at the thing you've written basic nouns and verbs and see if they understand it ask ask your friend to suffer through a five minute pitch of yours with the battle deck images random images and you'll find that well it may not be in the best interest of their time it will remarkably increase your abilities but you need to reach out to these people and engage them though they may have no idea what you're doing in the practice of storytelling right right well and i think is well the point i just wanted to bring it up again that you had said you know you might be a career professor you've given lectures every day for 30 years but you might have been rehearsing to reach a different audience than that you're going to go reach whenever you need to sit in and present to whether it's venture capital or whether it's just another research team where you're trying to recruit a new partner for your project so not just practice but also recognizing the need that you might you might have already done some rehearsing but you might need to do some different type of rehearsing to be really effective yeah it's this I can say with certainty every startup that comes in to the program within the thing it's week one day one we throw those slides away and we may actually end up on the end of the program 90 days later we bring a lot of it if certainly not some of it back in it's just that you can't make progress on developing a new story or most quickly what you're talking about speaking to a new audience if you're using an old story that you've sort of built a battle sort of a wall around you feeling comfortable and safe that you know that material just because you feel confident and safe that you know the material doesn't mean you're achieving your goal of communicating that material successfully to all the audience's that might or need to know that material so the exercises of today the idea of reaching out to other people the tips that I shared all of those will help you essentially throw out your existing PowerPoint slides starts from scratch it's a hard process blank canvas but you know takes these exercises to heart go through them and you'll arrive back at something which means even if it's not the best new presentation I'm sure you'll find improvements for the one you're currently doing now we have interesting two different but related questions and both kind of about convention in presentations in the technology world one person is asking you know what should be the kind of the proficiency of the credentials of the person presenting if you have small team and you're going in because of the need is you've been talking about to connect with both the head in a heart should you put maybe you're both your best presenter to the most natural presenter forward versus someone who who is maybe the most expert at the technical material you're covering and someone a related question and answer either of them or or none of that a related question is you know saying like there's a lot of people advising at these conferences to just stay with a very strict you know focus on just the facts and that where there might be some concern about kind of looking like you're going rogue or you're maybe being catchy or following a sad and following this different approach so how would you kind of balance attention I guess where you know people want to be taken seriously and be seen as expert but at the same time as you're set advising having the ability to connect with you know words pictures and air with these things like that sure so i'll come back to the high degree line of stories are the deep structure of being there is not a single soul on this planet who does not want to hear a story it's what every child asks before they go to bed and it's why we turn the TV on we all want to hear a store we and we may use different language to say that we may say things like I want to understand your business plan or I want to understand what research breakthroughs you've achieved but fundamentally if you're going to engage in a conversation like that you are telling a story so the degree to which you kind of go rogue or go off script or try something out that's not traditional is only a factor of your confidence in delivering that discourse of the content that you have so what I would suggest is if you want to be different because you want to stand out okay you can do that but if you're not confident in your ability to do that if you've not practiced it and rehearsed it and dumb the exercises to test it against your various audiences then you will look like a bad story teller and it will backfire against you so it kind of follows along with the answers that I would give to the first question which is you always want your best storyteller to give the presentation the caveat being they need to be able to answer questions that its continued the story even after the frame of the story has been closed and so it's very convenient when you have a forum where there are no questions where it is not a conversation it is a one-way storytelling like TV is a great example of that and that's why they put the best storytellers on TV the actors and the writers themselves in a two-way experience where there's QA you just have to be mindful that you're sort of best hitter your best pitcher or whatever the best storyteller is not necessarily going to be the answer because they actually have to follow through with that story into all the details sort of the fractal edges of allpossibilities that that story might create this provocations there's arguments that they might create in the minds of the audience so if you're feeling confident about your ability to tell stories go with it no matter what the format required because everybody wants a good story and if you've got a good storyteller on your team and they know the material enough to kind of handle the follow-up to the story then go with that person e they aren't dub so to speak first person the original person who has come up with the idea right set type title position on the team not necessarily as essential as having the ability to bring both of those to bear now we have another question here that I think also can ring through to anyone who's attended a conference but it's about links and an understanding you know what does I think every would be great if there was a proper you know rule of thumb in every case obviously it's situational but what would be your guidance on on people as they think about length so I think the average conference go over its day you know people's presentations are too long and they you know it's not just that they're putting the script on this page but that they're just trying to present too much information but you know with things that are in a technical as they are in the energy technology space how do you counsel people to hit that right balance yep there is no there is no number in the sense that one number is better than others i've done presentations of a hundred slides in five minutes and has done presentations with zero slides in an hour the real question that's kind of up for grabs though is how do you keep your audience engaged with you no matter what the time is you know there probably isn't upper boundary right I'm sure at some point after hours and hours you have to go to the bathroom but but what movies teach us is you can definitely go for about two hours three hours and engage an audience in a story so it's not that the upper boundary or you know minimum boundary is the issue it's what are the ways in which whatever story you're telling you keep people along for the ride with you and and one tip that sort of is thread throughout all of this material and I hope you picked up on and in specific I talked about with the idea of the number three which you saw repeated ad nauseam throughout my presentation is if you sell the structure your presentation and you give people clear demarcation points when you have begun one section and ended the prior they are more willing to follow along with you so you heard we often say things like I have slides and I'm going to go through those or I have three tips and i'm going to go through those every time i use that technique you are just that much more likely to follow along with me than not because you know that there is a finite end to what i'm doing but the trick that I'm pulling is that I'm constantly doing that and I could for hours if I'm a very good presenter and I quite sure I'm there yet I could keep streaming those tricks along saying I'm going to tell you this many things and when this many things come to pass I had then revealed the next many things and that kind of gating that kind of threshold of only revealing a certain amount of detail about what's to come in the future so that your audience patiently waits for that to happen it's a great way to keep that rhythm going of the presentation now that that doesn't absolve you from having to be engaging an evocative and emotional during the time you're actually doing those ten or three slides but that's a great technique to extend or to deal with the sort of length that you feel you have to get through without actually making it seem like it's an infinitude of hundreds of slides in a deck that has no beginning no middle and no end excellent know that that does that make sense and it's basically providing it in bite-size portions you know you don't need to stay call at once you get it cut it up yes that's right and think of it and think of those bytes as different sizes to write its it gets very boring if you say I'm going to do three things and then three comes to pass I'm going to do three things and three coats bass I'm going to do three they like that can seem in you know infinite as well so it's about varying those bite-sized portions small than large them small the medium you can actually change together those bite-sized pieces for quite a long time well did we really appreciate your presentation and sharing your thoughts with us today and I know that it's been really need to watch the coverage of start participants that you guys have had and I encouraged everyone on the phone if today was the first time that you've heard of green start you know check out their site and and check out what their what their companies and participants are doing I think that there's a lot that can be learned and we appreciate the openness data that you guys have had on some of the tools that you use the hook the battle decks oh I didn't want to mention to everyone if if you want to see the examples of some people trying out the battle deck practice tool we have the video of David's presentation from this loss februari in and some three very brave individuals who came up and gave that a shot you know again it's not i would say it's not often in the very cost intensive world of developing technology that you get a lot of free advice that you can go execute with your team with no startup costs so thanks again David for for your participation today it's great to have you thank you and i'll send you these slides right now so everyone on the phone would like them can have them as well great thanks everyone and if you do have when you get the email with his live later today if you do have talks suggestions feedback on today's program or suggestions for future topics that you'd like to see us cover here at our PE university or it could be a topic for a person please email me md lose Ansky my information will be in the email and we look forward to seeing you next time take care
