
1776 is a global network empowering innovators everywhere to shape the digital transformation of critical industries.

Credit: [1776](https://www.1776.vc/)

{! search-content: !}

1776 logo
Subscribe
Login
1776 logo
Insights
Events
Challenge Cup
Memberships
Memberships
Book a Tour
Washington, D.C.
Crystal City
New York City
Dubai
Investments
Subscribe
Login
     
About
Careers
Members
Partners
Contact
Privacy Policy
© 2017. 1776 All Rights Reserved.
 Search
About

Obama visiting 1776
At 1776, we know that startups can change the world and we’re building the global community to provide the intellectual, social, and financial capital to help them make that a reality.

Our Focus
We’ve purposely chosen challenging, government-dominated markets because our roots in Washington, DC give us proprietary connections, insights, and tools that can be used to drive massive scale revenue growth. The key to it all is connections and learning, which we curate through our global platform Union.

We connect our startups to the latest wisdom on how to build highly scalable businesses through our curriculum. To expert mentors who can help startups quickly solve problems. To markets through our institutional and corporate partners. To capital through our investor network and the 1776 Seed Fund. And to talent through our community relationships across the globe. Here are just a few different ways to join our global community:


Members
1776 is focused on helping high-growth startups in the industries most challenging to drive innovation and scale —education, energy and sustainability, health, transportation and cities.
Meet our Members 


Partners
By joining 1776, corporate partners gain access to entrepreneurs from around the world, gaining early visibility to the ideas of the future and injecting fresh energy into their businesses.
Meet our Corporate Partners 


Investments
Our investors are looking for venture scale returns, and are investing in our fund to drive massive global change.
See our Investments


Creating and Fostering a Global Community
1776 has forged partnerships with leading startup incubators in the world’s most dense startup communities—known as the Startup Federation—and we are tapping those relationships to build density globally and operate an ecosystem that transcends geographic boundaries. As a result, our world’s most promising entrepreneurs and young companies can access the resources they need to scale regardless of the city the choose to call home.

To highlight the importance of these global connections, 1776 hosts an annual competition called the Challenge Cup, engaging Startup Federation partners in 16 cities across the world, to identify the most promising new startups and connect them with the information, mentors and resources they need to succeed—regardless of their geographic location.


To build and scale a business, it takes more than just a great idea. By joining 1776, startups gain access to a global network of connections with established institutions and corporations, influencers, expert mentors, and investors.
Become a startup member


The world has changed, and corporations are finding a storm of technology and disruption raining on them from seemingly every direction. By joining 1776, corporate member gain a critical new lens into these bold new solutions as well as the very culture, mindset and tools entrepreneurs employ to think differently about the future.
Become a corporate member


The startups in the 1776 Seed Fund portfolio are those that have put the full power of the 1776 connections to work, proven they can build highly scalable businesses in regulated markets, and are poised to drive change in areas that will make a positive impact on our world’s biggest challenges.
Learn about our Portfolio


Get involved
Want to get involved in the 1776 community, but you’re not sure how? Email us at info@1776.vc and we’ll find the right fit for you.


Meet our founders
1776 was founded in February 2013 by Donna Harris, a serial entrepreneur and the former Managing Director of the Startup America Partnership, and Evan Burfield, founder of netDecide, a provider of enterprise wealth management solutions, as well as the consulting firm Synteractive.

Donna Harris
Cofounder and Strategic Advisor, 1776

Evan Burfield
Cofounder & CEO, 1776
   
Meet our Team
Meet the rest of the Team
Press inquiries
For media inquires, contact press@1776.vc

 1776 in the News

The National: American Incubator 1776 Nurtures Dubai Start-ups

Fast Company: How Global Incubator 1776 Plans To Diversify NYC’s Tech Sector

Zawya: U.S. Innovation Incubator 1776 Opens Dubai Campus

NY1: 1776 Challenge Cup Highlights Startups Looking to Do Good

Fast Company: New York’s Chief Digital Officer Rachel Haot Joins Global Incubator 1776

 

Press releases

May 22, 2017 Washington, D.C. Startup Mobile Passport Chosen to Advance to Global Finals in the 1776 Challenge Cup Competition May 18, 2017 1776 and Axios Partner for the Washington, D.C. Kickoff of the Global Challenge Cup Competition May 17, 2017 1776 and Transurban Announce Startup Challenge to Power Smart Highways More press releases
Get the 1776 weekly insights in your inbox Subscribe
TOP
1776 logo
About
Careers
Members
Partners
Contact
At 1776, we’re a global incubator and seed fund that believes startups can change the world. We’re building a global community to provide the intellectual, social and financial capital these startups need to succeed.
     
Privacy Policy
© 2017 1776 All Rights Reserved.
