Here's an example of a description that appears under a link.

15 MIN READ || The Wilmer Hale website provides customized legal document creation and growth of a startup. 

Credit: [Wilmerhale Launch](https://launch.wilmerhale.com)

{! search-content: !}

Document Generator

Our Document Generator is custom-tailored to offer important legal documents that will enable you to start and grow your company. It is an invaluable resource for entrepreneurs and founders of startups in various stages of growth and is designed to help you navigate the unfamiliar and manage interrelated issues. The Document Generator has been developed with the guidance of our experienced lawyers who have a longstanding tradition of offering strategic advice and an indispensable business perspective.

Before you, any entity that you represent or on behalf of which you utilize the Document Generator, or any successor to you or such entity (collectively, "you" or "your") are able to access the Document Generator, as well as several downloadable forms we make available outside our Document Generator, you must read and agree to the following:

Document Generator Terms and Conditions

In connection with your use of this WilmerHale Launch, Document Generator and all documents generated in connection with your use of the Document Generator ("Generated Materials"), you agree to these terms and conditions and to the Website Terms of Use at www.launch.wilmerhale.com/wh-disclaimer/ and the Privacy Policy at www.wilmerhale.com/privacy/, as such documents may be updated by WilmerHale from time to time, each of which is incorporated by reference in these terms and conditions. IF YOU DO NOT ACCEPT THESE TERMS AND CONDITIONS, YOU WILL NOT BE PERMITTED TO USE THE DOCUMENT GENERATOR OR RECEIVE ANY GENERATED MATERIALS.

You agree and acknowledge that the Generated Materials are prepared by Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP ("WilmerHale") for your informational purposes only without any knowledge of your industry, business model or other specific circumstances. You further agree that the provision of Generated Materials to you, and your provision of information to WilmerHale through the Document Generator or otherwise, (i) does not constitute the provision of legal, tax or other professional advice by WilmerHale and (ii) shall not create an attorney-client or other confidential or privileged relationship between you and WilmerHale. To ensure compliance with requirements imposed by the IRS, we inform you that any discussion of tax matters or any other information in WilmerHale Launch, the Document Generator or any Generated Materials is not intended or written to be used, and cannot be used, for the purpose of (i) avoiding penalties under the Internal Revenue Code or (ii) promoting, marketing or recommending to another party any transaction or matter addressed herein. Your use of Generated Materials does not constitute tax or legal advice from WilmerHale. The tax consequences may vary based on your particular circumstances. You are strongly encouraged to consult your tax advisor regarding the tax consequences to you of incorporating your business and the issuance of stock to you and other service providers. The Document Generator should not be used as a substitute for consultation with professional advisors. You should seek legal and tax advice from attorneys licensed in the relevant jurisdiction(s) before relying on any of the Generated Materials.

The contents of WilmerHale Launch, the Document Generator and the Generated Materials may be considered advertising for legal services under the laws and rules of professional conduct of the jurisdictions in which we practice.

WilmerHale Launch, the Document Generator and the Generated Materials are provided for companies with no material assets, operations or liabilities where the resulting company, when formed and after any anticipated founder contributions, would have minimal value. The General Materials should not be used to incorporate a business that has material assets or operations without seeking legal, tax and accounting advice. Further, the Generated Materials are generic forms which may have bracketed or highlighted items which require your review and/or modification before finalizing the wording. The application and impact of relevant laws will vary based on industry, identity, jurisdiction and other circumstances. The provision of the Document Generator and any resulting Generated Materials does not represent any undertaking to keep you advised of any legal developments. You must review the Generated Materials thoroughly prior to use to ensure that their terms are acceptable to you and reflect your intent. You further agree that you shall use the Generated Materials in compliance with all applicable law and regulation.

USE OF THE DOCUMENT GENERATOR AND ANY GENERATED MATERIALS IS ENTIRELY AT YOUR OWN RISK. YOU ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THE DOCUMENT GENERATOR AND ANY GENERATED MATERIALS ARE PROVIDED "AS IS" WITH NO WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. YOU HEREBY IRREVOCABLY AND FULLY WAIVE ANY CLAIMS, KNOWN OR UNKNOWN, YOU MAY HAVE AGAINST WILMERHALE, NOW OR IN THE FUTURE, IN CONNECTION WITH WILMERHALE LAUNCH, THE DOCUMENT GENERATOR AND THE GENERATED MATERIALS.

In connection with the preparation of the Generated Materials, you will be prompted to provide certain information. By using the Document Generator and submitting any information, you represent, warrant and covenant that you have the right and authority to provide such information and that such information is not confidential. While Document Generator may temporarily store your information and a copy of the Generated Materials based on that information, we cannot guarantee the security of any such information or Generated Materials and we cannot guarantee that such information or Generated Materials will not be lost. Our use of any such information is subject to our Privacy Policy as referenced above.

These terms and conditions, the Document Generator and the Generated Materials may be modified, suspended or terminated by WilmerHale at any time, with or without notice, for any or no reason in WilmerHale's sole discretion; provided that any changes to these terms and conditions will apply only from the time in which such new terms and conditions are posted to the Document Generator.

Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP is a Delaware limited liability partnership. WilmerHale principal law offices: 60 State Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02109, +1 617 526 6000; 1875 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20006, +1 202 663 6000. Our United Kingdom offices are operated under a separate Delaware limited liability partnership of solicitors and registered foreign lawyers authorized and regulated by the Solicitors Regulation Authority (SRA No. 287488). Our professional rules can be found at www.sra.org.uk/solicitors/code-of-conduct.page. A list of partners and their professional qualifications is available for inspection at our UK offices. In Beijing, we are registered to operate as a Foreign Law Firm Representative Office.
- See more at: https://launch.wilmerhale.com/build/document-generator/#sthash.ddjf1pyK.dpuf
